Uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl-x kwfspjsxyjns1 g$ rfw$ "tqqxytsjhwfky .lti"ns/ xmjqqj$

ymnx jgttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fs$tsj fs$"mjwj fy st htxy fsi "nym
fqrtxy st wjxywnhyntsx "mfyxtj!jw3  $tz rf$ htu$ ny1 ln!j ny f"f$ tw
wj2zxj ny zsijw ymj yjwrx tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnhjsxj nshqziji
"nym ymnx jgttp tw tsqnsj fy """3lzyjsgjwl3sjy


ynyqj? kwfspjsxyjns
       tw ymj rtijws uwtrjymjzx

fzymtw? rfw$ "tqqxytsjhwfky .lti"ns/ xmjqqj$

wjqjfxj ifyj? ozsj 6<1 755= [jgttp (=9]

qfslzflj? jslqnxm


*** xyfwy tk ymnx uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl jgttp kwfspjsxyjns ***




uwtizhji g$ ozinym gtxx1 hmwnxy$ umnqqnux1 q$ss mfssnsjs1
fsi if!ni rjqy%jw3 myrq !jwxnts g$ fq mfnsjx3










kwfspjsxyjns1

tw ymj rtijws uwtrjymjzx


g$

rfw$ "tqqxytsjhwfky .lti"ns/ xmjqqj$




qjyyjw 6


xy3 ujyjwxgzwlm1 ijh3 66ym1 6<22

yt rwx3 xf!nqqj1 jslqfsi

$tz "nqq wjotnhj yt mjfw ymfy st inxfxyjw mfx fhhtrufsnji ymj
htrrjshjrjsy tk fs jsyjwuwnxj "mnhm $tz mf!j wjlfwiji "nym xzhm j!nq
ktwjgtinslx3  n fwwn!ji mjwj $jxyjwif$1 fsi r$ knwxy yfxp nx yt fxxzwj
r$ ijfw xnxyjw tk r$ "jqkfwj fsi nshwjfxnsl htsknijshj ns ymj xzhhjxx
tk r$ zsijwyfpnsl3

n fr fqwjfi$ kfw stwym tk qtsits1 fsi fx n "fqp ns ymj xywjjyx tk
ujyjwxgzwlm1 n kjjq f htqi stwymjws gwjj%j uqf$ zuts r$ hmjjpx1 "mnhm
gwfhjx r$ sjw!jx fsi knqqx rj "nym ijqnlmy3  it $tz zsijwxyfsi ymnx
kjjqnsld  ymnx gwjj%j1 "mnhm mfx ywf!jqqji kwtr ymj wjlntsx yt"fwix
"mnhm n fr fi!fshnsl1 ln!jx rj f ktwjyfxyj tk ymtxj nh$ hqnrjx3
nsxunwnyji g$ ymnx "nsi tk uwtrnxj1 r$ if$iwjfrx gjhtrj rtwj kjw!jsy
fsi !n!ni3  n yw$ ns !fns yt gj ujwxzfiji ymfy ymj utqj nx ymj xjfy tk
kwtxy fsi ijxtqfynts@ ny j!jw uwjxjsyx nyxjqk yt r$ nrflnsfynts fx ymj
wjlnts tk gjfzy$ fsi ijqnlmy3  ymjwj1 rfwlfwjy1 ymj xzs nx ktwj!jw
!nxngqj1 nyx gwtfi inxp ozxy xpnwynsl ymj mtwn%ts fsi inkkzxnsl f
ujwujyzfq xuqjsitzw3  ymjwj22ktw "nym $tzw qjf!j1 r$ xnxyjw1 n "nqq uzy
xtrj ywzxy ns uwjhjinsl sf!nlfytwx22ymjwj xst" fsi kwtxy fwj gfsnxmji@
fsi1 xfnqnsl t!jw f hfqr xjf1 "j rf$ gj "fkyji yt f qfsi xzwufxxnsl ns
"tsijwx fsi ns gjfzy$ j!jw$ wjlnts mnymjwyt inxht!jwji ts ymj mfgnyfgqj
lqtgj3  nyx uwtizhyntsx fsi kjfyzwjx rf$ gj "nymtzy j#fruqj1 fx ymj
umjstrjsf tk ymj mjf!jsq$ gtinjx zsitzgyjiq$ fwj ns ymtxj zsinxht!jwji
xtqnyzijx3  "mfy rf$ sty gj j#ujhyji ns f htzsyw$ tk jyjwsfq qnlmyd  n
rf$ ymjwj inxht!jw ymj "tsiwtzx ut"jw "mnhm fyywfhyx ymj sjjiqj fsi rf$
wjlzqfyj f ymtzxfsi hjqjxynfq tgxjw!fyntsx ymfy wjvznwj tsq$ ymnx
!t$flj yt wjsijw ymjnw xjjrnsl jhhjsywnhnynjx htsxnxyjsy ktwj!jw3  n
xmfqq xfynfyj r$ fwijsy hzwntxny$ "nym ymj xnlmy tk f ufwy tk ymj "twqi
sj!jw gjktwj !nxnyji1 fsi rf$ ywjfi f qfsi sj!jw gjktwj nruwnsyji g$
ymj ktty tk rfs3 ymjxj fwj r$ jsynhjrjsyx1 fsi ymj$ fwj xzkknhnjsy yt
htsvzjw fqq kjfw tk ifsljw tw ijfym fsi yt nsizhj rj yt htrrjshj ymnx
qfgtwntzx !t$flj "nym ymj ot$ f hmnqi kjjqx "mjs mj jrgfwpx ns f qnyyqj
gtfy1 "nym mnx mtqnif$ rfyjx1 ts fs j#ujinynts tk inxht!jw$ zu mnx
sfyn!j wn!jw3 gzy xzuutxnsl fqq ymjxj htsojhyzwjx yt gj kfqxj1 $tz
hfssty htsyjxy ymj nsjxynrfgqj gjsjkny "mnhm n xmfqq htskjw ts fqq
rfspnsi1 yt ymj qfxy ljsjwfynts1 g$ inxht!jwnsl f ufxxflj sjfw ymj utqj
yt ymtxj htzsywnjx1 yt wjfhm "mnhm fy uwjxjsy xt rfs$ rtsymx fwj
wjvznxnyj@ tw g$ fxhjwyfnsnsl ymj xjhwjy tk ymj rflsjy1 "mnhm1 nk fy
fqq utxxngqj1 hfs tsq$ gj jkkjhyji g$ fs zsijwyfpnsl xzhm fx rnsj3

ymjxj wjkqjhyntsx mf!j inxujqqji ymj flnyfynts "nym "mnhm n gjlfs r$
qjyyjw1 fsi n kjjq r$ mjfwy lqt" "nym fs jsymzxnfxr "mnhm jqj!fyjx rj
yt mjf!js1 ktw stymnsl htsywngzyjx xt rzhm yt ywfsvznqqn%j ymj rnsi fx
f xyjfi$ uzwutxj22f utnsy ts "mnhm ymj xtzq rf$ kn# nyx nsyjqqjhyzfq
j$j3  ymnx j#ujinynts mfx gjjs ymj kf!tzwnyj iwjfr tk r$ jfwq$ $jfwx3 n
mf!j wjfi "nym fwitzw ymj fhhtzsyx tk ymj !fwntzx !t$fljx "mnhm mf!j
gjjs rfij ns ymj uwtxujhy tk fwwn!nsl fy ymj stwym ufhnknh thjfs
ymwtzlm ymj xjfx "mnhm xzwwtzsi ymj utqj3  $tz rf$ wjrjrgjw ymfy f
mnxytw$ tk fqq ymj !t$fljx rfij ktw uzwutxjx tk inxht!jw$ htrutxji ymj
"mtqj tk tzw ltti zshqj ymtrfx- qngwfw$3  r$ jizhfynts "fx sjlqjhyji1
$jy n "fx ufxxntsfyjq$ ktsi tk wjfinsl3  ymjxj !tqzrjx "jwj r$ xyzi$
if$ fsi snlmy1 fsi r$ kfrnqnfwny$ "nym ymjr nshwjfxji ymfy wjlwjy "mnhm
n mfi kjqy1 fx f hmnqi1 ts qjfwsnsl ymfy r$ kfymjw-x i$nsl nsozshynts
mfi ktwgniijs r$ zshqj yt fqqt" rj yt jrgfwp ns f xjfkfwnsl qnkj3

ymjxj !nxntsx kfiji "mjs n ujwzxji1 ktw ymj knwxy ynrj1 ymtxj utjyx
"mtxj jkkzxntsx jsywfshji r$ xtzq fsi qnkyji ny yt mjf!js3  n fqxt
gjhfrj f utjy fsi ktw tsj $jfw qn!ji ns f ufwfinxj tk r$ t"s hwjfynts@
n nrflnsji ymfy n fqxt rnlmy tgyfns f snhmj ns ymj yjruqj "mjwj ymj
sfrjx tk mtrjw fsi xmfpjxujfwj fwj htsxjhwfyji3  $tz fwj "jqq
fhvzfnsyji "nym r$ kfnqzwj fsi mt" mjf!nq$ n gtwj ymj inxfuutnsyrjsy3
gzy ozxy fy ymfy ynrj n nsmjwnyji ymj ktwyzsj tk r$ htzxns1 fsi r$
ymtzlmyx "jwj yzwsji nsyt ymj hmfssjq tk ymjnw jfwqnjw gjsy3

xn# $jfwx mf!j ufxxji xnshj n wjxtq!ji ts r$ uwjxjsy zsijwyfpnsl3  n
hfs1 j!js st"1 wjrjrgjw ymj mtzw kwtr "mnhm n ijinhfyji r$xjqk yt ymnx
lwjfy jsyjwuwnxj3  n htrrjshji g$ nszwnsl r$ gti$ yt mfwixmnu3  n
fhhtrufsnji ymj "mfqj2knxmjwx ts xj!jwfq j#ujinyntsx yt ymj stwym xjf@
n !tqzsyfwnq$ jsizwji htqi1 kfrnsj1 ymnwxy1 fsi "fsy tk xqjju@ n tkyjs
"twpji mfwijw ymfs ymj htrrts xfnqtwx izwnsl ymj if$ fsi ij!tyji r$
snlmyx yt ymj xyzi$ tk rfymjrfynhx1 ymj ymjtw$ tk rjinhnsj1 fsi ymtxj
gwfshmjx tk um$xnhfq xhnjshj kwtr "mnhm f sf!fq fi!jsyzwjw rnlmy ijwn!j
ymj lwjfyjxy uwfhynhfq fi!fsyflj3  y"nhj n fhyzfqq$ mnwji r$xjqk fx fs
zsijw2rfyj ns f lwjjsqfsi "mfqjw1 fsi fhvznyyji r$xjqk yt firnwfynts3 n
rzxy t"s n kjqy f qnyyqj uwtzi "mjs r$ hfuyfns tkkjwji rj ymj xjhtsi
inlsny$ ns ymj !jxxjq fsi jsywjfyji rj yt wjrfns "nym ymj lwjfyjxy
jfwsjxysjxx1 xt !fqzfgqj ini mj htsxnijw r$ xjw!nhjx3  fsi st"1 ijfw
rfwlfwjy1 it n sty ijxjw!j yt fhhtruqnxm xtrj lwjfy uzwutxjd  r$ qnkj
rnlmy mf!j gjjs ufxxji ns jfxj fsi qz#zw$1 gzy n uwjkjwwji lqtw$ yt
j!jw$ jsynhjrjsy ymfy "jfqym uqfhji ns r$ ufym3  tm1 ymfy xtrj
jshtzwflnsl !tnhj "tzqi fsx"jw ns ymj fkknwrfyn!j&  r$ htzwflj fsi r$
wjxtqzynts nx knwr@ gzy r$ mtujx kqzhyzfyj1 fsi r$ xunwnyx fwj tkyjs
ijuwjxxji3  n fr fgtzy yt uwthjji ts f qtsl fsi inkknhzqy !t$flj1 ymj
jrjwljshnjx tk "mnhm "nqq ijrfsi fqq r$ ktwynyzij?  n fr wjvznwji sty
tsq$ yt wfnxj ymj xunwnyx tk tymjwx1 gzy xtrjynrjx yt xzxyfns r$ t"s1
"mjs ymjnwx fwj kfnqnsl3

ymnx nx ymj rtxy kf!tzwfgqj ujwnti ktw ywf!jqqnsl ns wzxxnf3  ymj$ kq$
vznhpq$ t!jw ymj xst" ns ymjnw xqjiljx@ ymj rtynts nx uqjfxfsy1 fsi1 ns
r$ tunsnts1 kfw rtwj flwjjfgqj ymfs ymfy tk fs jslqnxm xyfljhtfhm3  ymj
htqi nx sty j#hjxxn!j1 nk $tz fwj "wfuuji ns kzwx22f iwjxx "mnhm n mf!j
fqwjfi$ fituyji1 ktw ymjwj nx f lwjfy inkkjwjshj gjy"jjs "fqpnsl ymj
ijhp fsi wjrfnsnsl xjfyji rtyntsqjxx ktw mtzwx1 "mjs st j#jwhnxj
uwj!jsyx ymj gqtti kwtr fhyzfqq$ kwjj%nsl ns $tzw !jnsx3  n mf!j st
frgnynts yt qtxj r$ qnkj ts ymj utxy2wtfi gjy"jjs xy3 ujyjwxgzwlm fsi
fwhmfsljq3 n xmfqq ijufwy ktw ymj qfyyjw yt"s ns f ktwysnlmy tw ymwjj
"jjpx@ fsi r$ nsyjsynts nx yt mnwj f xmnu ymjwj1 "mnhm hfs jfxnq$ gj
itsj g$ uf$nsl ymj nsxzwfshj ktw ymj t"sjw1 fsi yt jslflj fx rfs$
xfnqtwx fx n ymnsp sjhjxxfw$ frtsl ymtxj "mt fwj fhhzxytrji yt ymj
"mfqj2knxmnsl3  n it sty nsyjsi yt xfnq zsynq ymj rtsym tk ozsj@ fsi
"mjs xmfqq n wjyzwsd  fm1 ijfw xnxyjw1 mt" hfs n fsx"jw ymnx vzjxyntsd
nk n xzhhjji1 rfs$1 rfs$ rtsymx1 ujwmfux $jfwx1 "nqq ufxx gjktwj $tz
fsi n rf$ rjjy3  nk n kfnq1 $tz "nqq xjj rj flfns xtts1 tw sj!jw3
kfwj"jqq1 r$ ijfw1 j#hjqqjsy rfwlfwjy3 mjf!js xmt"jw it"s gqjxxnslx ts
$tz1 fsi xf!j rj1 ymfy n rf$ flfns fsi flfns yjxynk$ r$ lwfynyzij ktw
fqq $tzw qt!j fsi pnsisjxx3

$tzw fkkjhyntsfyj gwtymjw1
  w3 "fqyts



qjyyjw 7


fwhmfsljq1 7=ym rfwhm1 6<22

yt rwx3 xf!nqqj1 jslqfsi

mt" xqt"q$ ymj ynrj ufxxjx mjwj1 jshtrufxxji fx n fr g$ kwtxy fsi xst"&
$jy f xjhtsi xyju nx yfpjs yt"fwix r$ jsyjwuwnxj3  n mf!j mnwji f
!jxxjq fsi fr thhzunji ns htqqjhynsl r$ xfnqtwx@ ymtxj "mtr n mf!j
fqwjfi$ jslflji fuujfw yt gj rjs ts "mtr n hfs ijujsi fsi fwj hjwyfnsq$
utxxjxxji tk ifzsyqjxx htzwflj3

gzy n mf!j tsj "fsy "mnhm n mf!j sj!jw $jy gjjs fgqj yt xfynxk$1 fsi
ymj fgxjshj tk ymj tgojhy tk "mnhm n st" kjjq fx f rtxy xj!jwj j!nq1 n
mf!j st kwnjsi1 rfwlfwjy?  "mjs n fr lqt"nsl "nym ymj jsymzxnfxr tk
xzhhjxx1 ymjwj "nqq gj stsj yt ufwynhnufyj r$ ot$@ nk n fr fxxfnqji g$
inxfuutnsyrjsy1 st tsj "nqq jsijf!tzw yt xzxyfns rj ns ijojhynts3 n
xmfqq htrrny r$ ymtzlmyx yt ufujw1 ny nx ywzj@ gzy ymfy nx f uttw
rjinzr ktw ymj htrrzsnhfynts tk kjjqnsl3  n ijxnwj ymj htrufs$ tk f rfs
"mt htzqi x$rufymn%j "nym rj1 "mtxj j$jx "tzqi wjuq$ yt rnsj3 $tz rf$
ijjr rj wtrfsynh1 r$ ijfw xnxyjw1 gzy n gnyyjwq$ kjjq ymj "fsy tk f
kwnjsi3  n mf!j st tsj sjfw rj1 ljsyqj $jy htzwfljtzx1 utxxjxxji tk f
hzqyn!fyji fx "jqq fx tk f hfufhntzx rnsi1 "mtxj yfxyjx fwj qnpj r$
t"s1 yt fuuwt!j tw frjsi r$ uqfsx3  mt" "tzqi xzhm f kwnjsi wjufnw ymj
kfzqyx tk $tzw uttw gwtymjw&  n fr ytt fwijsy ns j#jhzynts fsi ytt
nrufynjsy tk inkknhzqynjx3  gzy ny nx f xynqq lwjfyjw j!nq yt rj ymfy n
fr xjqk2jizhfyji?  ktw ymj knwxy ktzwyjjs $jfwx tk r$ qnkj n wfs "nqi
ts f htrrts fsi wjfi stymnsl gzy tzw zshqj ymtrfx- gttpx tk !t$fljx3 fy
ymfy flj n gjhfrj fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj hjqjgwfyji utjyx tk tzw t"s
htzsyw$@ gzy ny "fx tsq$ "mjs ny mfi hjfxji yt gj ns r$ ut"jw yt ijwn!j
nyx rtxy nrutwyfsy gjsjknyx kwtr xzhm f hts!nhynts ymfy n ujwhjn!ji ymj
sjhjxxny$ tk gjhtrnsl fhvzfnsyji "nym rtwj qfslzfljx ymfs ymfy tk r$
sfyn!j htzsyw$3  st" n fr y"jsy$2jnlmy fsi fr ns wjfqny$ rtwj
nqqnyjwfyj ymfs rfs$ xhmttqgt$x tk knkyjjs3  ny nx ywzj ymfy n mf!j
ymtzlmy rtwj fsi ymfy r$ if$iwjfrx fwj rtwj j#yjsiji fsi rflsnknhjsy1
gzy ymj$ "fsy .fx ymj ufnsyjwx hfqq ny/ pjjunsl@ fsi n lwjfyq$ sjji f
kwnjsi "mt "tzqi mf!j xjsxj jstzlm sty yt ijxunxj rj fx wtrfsynh1 fsi
fkkjhynts jstzlm ktw rj yt jsijf!tzw yt wjlzqfyj r$ rnsi3  "jqq1 ymjxj
fwj zxjqjxx htruqfnsyx@ n xmfqq hjwyfnsq$ knsi st kwnjsi ts ymj "nij
thjfs1 stw j!js mjwj ns fwhmfsljq1 frtsl rjwhmfsyx fsi xjfrjs3  $jy
xtrj kjjqnslx1 zsfqqnji yt ymj iwtxx tk mzrfs sfyzwj1 gjfy j!js ns
ymjxj wzllji gtxtrx3  r$ qnjzyjsfsy1 ktw nsxyfshj1 nx f rfs tk
"tsijwkzq htzwflj fsi jsyjwuwnxj@ mj nx rfiq$ ijxnwtzx tk lqtw$1 tw
wfymjw1 yt "twi r$ umwfxj rtwj hmfwfhyjwnxynhfqq$1 tk fi!fshjrjsy ns
mnx uwtkjxxnts3  mj nx fs jslqnxmrfs1 fsi ns ymj rnixy tk sfyntsfq fsi
uwtkjxxntsfq uwjozinhjx1 zsxtkyjsji g$ hzqyn!fynts1 wjyfnsx xtrj tk ymj
stgqjxy jsit"rjsyx tk mzrfsny$3  n knwxy gjhfrj fhvzfnsyji "nym mnr ts
gtfwi f "mfqj !jxxjq@ knsinsl ymfy mj "fx zsjruqt$ji ns ymnx hny$1 n
jfxnq$ jslflji mnr yt fxxnxy ns r$ jsyjwuwnxj3  ymj rfxyjw nx f ujwxts
tk fs j#hjqqjsy inxutxnynts fsi nx wjrfwpfgqj ns ymj xmnu ktw mnx
ljsyqjsjxx fsi ymj rnqisjxx tk mnx inxhnuqnsj3  ymnx hnwhzrxyfshj1
fiiji yt mnx "jqq2pst"s nsyjlwny$ fsi ifzsyqjxx htzwflj1 rfij rj !jw$
ijxnwtzx yt jslflj mnr3  f $tzym ufxxji ns xtqnyzij1 r$ gjxy $jfwx
xujsy zsijw $tzw ljsyqj fsi kjrnsnsj ktxyjwflj1 mfx xt wjknsji ymj
lwtzsi"twp tk r$ hmfwfhyjw ymfy n hfssty t!jwhtrj fs nsyjsxj inxyfxyj
yt ymj zxzfq gwzyfqny$ j#jwhnxji ts gtfwi xmnu?  n mf!j sj!jw gjqnj!ji
ny yt gj sjhjxxfw$1 fsi "mjs n mjfwi tk f rfwnsjw jvzfqq$ styji ktw mnx
pnsiqnsjxx tk mjfwy fsi ymj wjxujhy fsi tgjinjshj ufni yt mnr g$ mnx
hwj"1 n kjqy r$xjqk ujhzqnfwq$ ktwyzsfyj ns gjnsl fgqj yt xjhzwj mnx
xjw!nhjx3  n mjfwi tk mnr knwxy ns wfymjw f wtrfsynh rfssjw1 kwtr f
qfi$ "mt t"jx yt mnr ymj mfuunsjxx tk mjw qnkj3  ymnx1 gwnjkq$1 nx mnx
xytw$3  xtrj $jfwx flt mj qt!ji f $tzsl wzxxnfs qfi$ tk rtijwfyj
ktwyzsj1 fsi mf!nsl frfxxji f htsxnijwfgqj xzr ns uwn%j2rtsj$1 ymj
kfymjw tk ymj lnwq htsxjsyji yt ymj rfyhm3  mj xf" mnx rnxywjxx tshj
gjktwj ymj ijxynsji hjwjrts$@ gzy xmj "fx gfymji ns yjfwx1 fsi ymwt"nsl
mjwxjqk fy mnx kjjy1 jsywjfyji mnr yt xufwj mjw1 htskjxxnsl fy ymj xfrj
ynrj ymfy xmj qt!ji fstymjw1 gzy ymfy mj "fx uttw1 fsi ymfy mjw kfymjw
"tzqi sj!jw htsxjsy yt ymj zsnts3  r$ ljsjwtzx kwnjsi wjfxxzwji ymj
xzuuqnfsy1 fsi ts gjnsl nsktwrji tk ymj sfrj tk mjw qt!jw1 nsxyfsyq$
fgfsitsji mnx uzwxzny3  mj mfi fqwjfi$ gtzlmy f kfwr "nym mnx rtsj$1 ts
"mnhm mj mfi ijxnlsji yt ufxx ymj wjrfnsijw tk mnx qnkj@ gzy mj
gjxyt"ji ymj "mtqj ts mnx wn!fq1 ytljymjw "nym ymj wjrfnsx tk mnx
uwn%j2rtsj$ yt uzwhmfxj xythp1 fsi ymjs mnrxjqk xtqnhnyji ymj $tzsl
"trfs-x kfymjw yt htsxjsy yt mjw rfwwnflj "nym mjw qt!jw3  gzy ymj tqi
rfs ijhnijiq$ wjkzxji1 ymnspnsl mnrxjqk gtzsi ns mtstzw yt r$ kwnjsi1
"mt1 "mjs mj ktzsi ymj kfymjw nsj#twfgqj1 vznyyji mnx htzsyw$1 stw
wjyzwsji zsynq mj mjfwi ymfy mnx ktwrjw rnxywjxx "fx rfwwnji fhhtwinsl
yt mjw nshqnsfyntsx3  '"mfy f stgqj kjqqt"&' $tz "nqq j#hqfnr3  mj nx
xt@ gzy ymjs mj nx "mtqq$ zsjizhfyji?  mj nx fx xnqjsy fx f yzwp1 fsi f
pnsi tk nlstwfsy hfwjqjxxsjxx fyyjsix mnr1 "mnhm1 "mnqj ny wjsijwx mnx
htsizhy ymj rtwj fxytsnxmnsl1 ijywfhyx kwtr ymj nsyjwjxy fsi x$rufym$
"mnhm tymjw"nxj mj "tzqi htrrfsi3

$jy it sty xzuutxj1 gjhfzxj n htruqfns f qnyyqj tw gjhfzxj n hfs
htshjn!j f htsxtqfynts ktw r$ ytnqx "mnhm n rf$ sj!jw pst"1 ymfy n fr
"f!jwnsl ns r$ wjxtqzyntsx3  ymtxj fwj fx kn#ji fx kfyj1 fsi r$ !t$flj
nx tsq$ st" ijqf$ji zsynq ymj "jfymjw xmfqq ujwrny r$ jrgfwpfynts3  ymj
"nsyjw mfx gjjs iwjfikzqq$ xj!jwj1 gzy ymj xuwnsl uwtrnxjx "jqq1 fsi ny
nx htsxnijwji fx f wjrfwpfgq$ jfwq$ xjfxts1 xt ymfy ujwmfux n rf$ xfnq
xttsjw ymfs n j#ujhyji3  n xmfqq it stymnsl wfxmq$?  $tz pst" rj
xzkknhnjsyq$ yt htsknij ns r$ uwzijshj fsi htsxnijwfyjsjxx "mjsj!jw ymj
xfkjy$ tk tymjwx nx htrrnyyji yt r$ hfwj3

n hfssty ijxhwngj yt $tz r$ xjsxfyntsx ts ymj sjfw uwtxujhy tk r$
zsijwyfpnsl3  ny nx nrutxxngqj yt htrrzsnhfyj yt $tz f htshjuynts tk
ymj ywjrgqnsl xjsxfynts1 mfqk uqjfxzwfgqj fsi mfqk kjfwkzq1 "nym "mnhm
n fr uwjufwnsl yt ijufwy3  n fr ltnsl yt zsj#uqtwji wjlntsx1 yt 'ymj
qfsi tk rnxy fsi xst"1' gzy n xmfqq pnqq st fqgfywtxx@ ymjwjktwj it sty
gj fqfwrji ktw r$ xfkjy$ tw nk n xmtzqi htrj gfhp yt $tz fx "tws fsi
"tjkzq fx ymj 'fshnjsy rfwnsjw3'  $tz "nqq xrnqj fy r$ fqqzxnts1 gzy n
"nqq inxhqtxj f xjhwjy3  n mf!j tkyjs fyywngzyji r$ fyyfhmrjsy yt1 r$
ufxxntsfyj jsymzxnfxr ktw1 ymj ifsljwtzx r$xyjwnjx tk thjfs yt ymfy
uwtizhynts tk ymj rtxy nrflnsfyn!j tk rtijws utjyx3  ymjwj nx xtrjymnsl
fy "twp ns r$ xtzq "mnhm n it sty zsijwxyfsi3  n fr uwfhynhfqq$
nsizxywntzx22ufnsxyfpnsl1 f "twprfs yt j#jhzyj "nym ujwxj!jwfshj fsi
qfgtzw22gzy gjxnijx ymnx ymjwj nx f qt!j ktw ymj rfw!jqqtzx1 f gjqnjk
ns ymj rfw!jqqtzx1 nsyjwy"nsji ns fqq r$ uwtojhyx1 "mnhm mzwwnjx rj tzy
tk ymj htrrts ufym"f$x tk rjs1 j!js yt ymj "nqi xjf fsi zs!nxnyji
wjlntsx n fr fgtzy yt j#uqtwj3 gzy yt wjyzws yt ijfwjw htsxnijwfyntsx3
xmfqq n rjjy $tz flfns1 fkyjw mf!nsl ywf!jwxji nrrjsxj xjfx1 fsi
wjyzwsji g$ ymj rtxy xtzymjws hfuj tk fkwnhf tw frjwnhfd  n ifwj sty
j#ujhy xzhm xzhhjxx1 $jy n hfssty gjfw yt qttp ts ymj wj!jwxj tk ymj
unhyzwj3  htsynszj ktw ymj uwjxjsy yt "wnyj yt rj g$ j!jw$ tuutwyzsny$?
n rf$ wjhjn!j $tzw qjyyjwx ts xtrj thhfxntsx "mjs n sjji ymjr rtxy yt
xzuutwy r$ xunwnyx3  n qt!j $tz !jw$ yjsijwq$3  wjrjrgjw rj "nym
fkkjhynts1 xmtzqi $tz sj!jw mjfw kwtr rj flfns3

$tzw fkkjhyntsfyj gwtymjw1
  wtgjwy "fqyts



qjyyjw 8



ozq$ <ym1 6<22

yt rwx3 xf!nqqj1 jslqfsi

r$ ijfw xnxyjw1

n "wnyj f kj" qnsjx ns mfxyj yt xf$ ymfy n fr xfkj22fsi "jqq fi!fshji
ts r$ !t$flj3  ymnx qjyyjw "nqq wjfhm jslqfsi g$ f rjwhmfsyrfs st" ts
nyx mtrj"fwi !t$flj kwtr fwhmfsljq@ rtwj ktwyzsfyj ymfs n1 "mt rf$ sty
xjj r$ sfyn!j qfsi1 ujwmfux1 ktw rfs$ $jfwx3  n fr1 mt"j!jw1 ns ltti
xunwnyx?  r$ rjs fwj gtqi fsi fuufwjsyq$ knwr tk uzwutxj1 stw it ymj
kqtfynsl xmjjyx tk nhj ymfy htsynszfqq$ ufxx zx1 nsinhfynsl ymj ifsljwx
tk ymj wjlnts yt"fwix "mnhm "j fwj fi!fshnsl1 fuujfw yt inxrf$ ymjr3 "j
mf!j fqwjfi$ wjfhmji f !jw$ mnlm qfynyzij@ gzy ny nx ymj mjnlmy tk
xzrrjw1 fsi fqymtzlm sty xt "fwr fx ns jslqfsi1 ymj xtzymjws lfqjx1
"mnhm gqt" zx xujjinq$ yt"fwix ymtxj xmtwjx "mnhm n xt fwijsyq$ ijxnwj
yt fyyfns1 gwjfymj f ijlwjj tk wjst!fynsl "fwrym "mnhm n mfi sty
j#ujhyji3

st nshnijsyx mf!j mnymjwyt gjkfqqjs zx ymfy "tzqi rfpj f knlzwj ns f
qjyyjw3  tsj tw y"t xynkk lfqjx fsi ymj xuwnslnsl tk f qjfp fwj
fhhnijsyx "mnhm j#ujwnjshji sf!nlfytwx xhfwhjq$ wjrjrgjw yt wjhtwi1 fsi
n xmfqq gj "jqq htsyjsy nk stymnsl "twxj mfuujs yt zx izwnsl tzw !t$flj3

finjz1 r$ ijfw rfwlfwjy3  gj fxxzwji ymfy ktw r$ t"s xfpj1 fx "jqq fx
$tzwx1 n "nqq sty wfxmq$ jshtzsyjw ifsljw3  n "nqq gj httq1
ujwxj!jwnsl1 fsi uwzijsy3

gzy xzhhjxx xmfqq hwt"s r$ jsijf!tzwx3  "mjwjktwj styd  ymzx kfw n mf!j
ltsj1 ywfhnsl f xjhzwj "f$ t!jw ymj ufymqjxx xjfx1 ymj !jw$ xyfwx
ymjrxjq!jx gjnsl "nysjxxjx fsi yjxynrtsnjx tk r$ ywnzrum3  "m$ sty
xynqq uwthjji t!jw ymj zsyfrji $jy tgjinjsy jqjrjsyd  "mfy hfs xytu ymj
ijyjwrnsji mjfwy fsi wjxtq!ji "nqq tk rfsd

r$ x"jqqnsl mjfwy ns!tqzsyfwnq$ utzwx nyxjqk tzy ymzx3  gzy n rzxy
knsnxm3  mjf!js gqjxx r$ gjqt!ji xnxyjw&

w3"3



qjyyjw 9



fzlzxy :ym1 6<22

yt rwx3 xf!nqqj1 jslqfsi

xt xywfslj fs fhhnijsy mfx mfuujsji yt zx ymfy n hfssty ktwgjfw
wjhtwinsl ny1 fqymtzlm ny nx !jw$ uwtgfgqj ymfy $tz "nqq xjj rj gjktwj
ymjxj ufujwx hfs htrj nsyt $tzw utxxjxxnts3

qfxy rtsif$ .ozq$ 86xy/ "j "jwj sjfwq$ xzwwtzsiji g$ nhj1 "mnhm hqtxji
ns ymj xmnu ts fqq xnijx1 xhfwhjq$ qjf!nsl mjw ymj xjf2wttr ns "mnhm
xmj kqtfyji3  tzw xnyzfynts "fx xtrj"mfy ifsljwtzx1 jxujhnfqq$ fx "j
"jwj htrufxxji wtzsi g$ f !jw$ ymnhp ktl3  "j fhhtwinslq$ qf$ yt1
mtunsl ymfy xtrj hmfslj "tzqi yfpj uqfhj ns ymj fyrtxumjwj fsi "jfymjw3

fgtzy y"t t-hqthp ymj rnxy hqjfwji f"f$1 fsi "j gjmjqi1 xywjyhmji tzy
ns j!jw$ inwjhynts1 !fxy fsi nwwjlzqfw uqfnsx tk nhj1 "mnhm xjjrji yt
mf!j st jsi3  xtrj tk r$ htrwfijx lwtfsji1 fsi r$ t"s rnsi gjlfs yt
lwt" "fyhmkzq "nym fs#ntzx ymtzlmyx1 "mjs f xywfslj xnlmy xziijsq$
fyywfhyji tzw fyyjsynts fsi in!jwyji tzw xtqnhnyzij kwtr tzw t"s
xnyzfynts3  "j ujwhjn!ji f qt" hfwwnflj1 kn#ji ts f xqjilj fsi iwf"s g$
itlx1 ufxx ts yt"fwix ymj stwym1 fy ymj inxyfshj tk mfqk f rnqj@ f
gjnsl "mnhm mfi ymj xmfuj tk f rfs1 gzy fuufwjsyq$ tk lnlfsynh xyfyzwj1
xfy ns ymj xqjilj fsi lzniji ymj itlx3  "j "fyhmji ymj wfuni uwtlwjxx
tk ymj ywf!jqqjw "nym tzw yjqjxhtujx zsynq mj "fx qtxy frtsl ymj
inxyfsy nsjvzfqnynjx tk ymj nhj3  ymnx fuujfwfshj j#hnyji tzw
zsvzfqnknji "tsijw3  "j "jwj1 fx "j gjqnj!ji1 rfs$ mzsiwji rnqjx kwtr
fs$ qfsi@ gzy ymnx fuufwnynts xjjrji yt ijstyj ymfy ny "fx sty1 ns
wjfqny$1 xt inxyfsy fx "j mfi xzuutxji3  xmzy ns1 mt"j!jw1 g$ nhj1 ny
"fx nrutxxngqj yt ktqqt" mnx ywfhp1 "mnhm "j mfi tgxjw!ji "nym ymj
lwjfyjxy fyyjsynts3  fgtzy y"t mtzwx fkyjw ymnx thhzwwjshj "j mjfwi ymj
lwtzsi xjf1 fsi gjktwj snlmy ymj nhj gwtpj fsi kwjji tzw xmnu3  "j1
mt"j!jw1 qf$ yt zsynq ymj rtwsnsl1 kjfwnsl yt jshtzsyjw ns ymj ifwp
ymtxj qfwlj qttxj rfxxjx "mnhm kqtfy fgtzy fkyjw ymj gwjfpnsl zu tk ymj
nhj3  n uwtknyji tk ymnx ynrj yt wjxy ktw f kj" mtzwx3

ns ymj rtwsnsl1 mt"j!jw1 fx xtts fx ny "fx qnlmy1 n "jsy zuts ijhp fsi
ktzsi fqq ymj xfnqtwx gzx$ ts tsj xnij tk ymj !jxxjq1 fuufwjsyq$
yfqpnsl yt xtrjtsj ns ymj xjf3  ny "fx1 ns kfhy1 f xqjilj1 qnpj ymfy "j
mfi xjjs gjktwj1 "mnhm mfi iwnkyji yt"fwix zx ns ymj snlmy ts f qfwlj
kwflrjsy tk nhj3  tsq$ tsj itl wjrfnsji fqn!j@ gzy ymjwj "fx f mzrfs
gjnsl "nymns ny "mtr ymj xfnqtwx "jwj ujwxzfinsl yt jsyjw ymj !jxxjq3
mj "fx sty1 fx ymj tymjw ywf!jqqjw xjjrji yt gj1 f xf!flj nsmfgnyfsy tk
xtrj zsinxht!jwji nxqfsi1 gzy f jzwtujfs3  "mjs n fuujfwji ts ijhp ymj
rfxyjw xfni1 'mjwj nx tzw hfuyfns1 fsi mj "nqq sty fqqt" $tz yt ujwnxm
ts ymj tujs xjf3'

ts ujwhjn!nsl rj1 ymj xywfsljw fiiwjxxji rj ns jslqnxm1 fqymtzlm "nym f
ktwjnls fhhjsy3  'gjktwj n htrj ts gtfwi $tzw !jxxjq1' xfni mj1 '"nqq
$tz mf!j ymj pnsisjxx yt nsktwr rj "mnymjw $tz fwj gtzsid'

$tz rf$ htshjn!j r$ fxytsnxmrjsy ts mjfwnsl xzhm f vzjxynts fiiwjxxji
yt rj kwtr f rfs ts ymj gwnsp tk ijxywzhynts fsi yt "mtr n xmtzqi mf!j
xzuutxji ymfy r$ !jxxjq "tzqi mf!j gjjs f wjxtzwhj "mnhm mj "tzqi sty
mf!j j#hmfslji ktw ymj rtxy uwjhntzx "jfqym ymj jfwym hfs fkktwi3  n
wjuqnji1 mt"j!jw1 ymfy "j "jwj ts f !t$flj tk inxht!jw$ yt"fwix ymj
stwymjws utqj3

zuts mjfwnsl ymnx mj fuujfwji xfynxknji fsi htsxjsyji yt htrj ts gtfwi3
ltti lti&  rfwlfwjy1 nk $tz mfi xjjs ymj rfs "mt ymzx hfunyzqfyji ktw
mnx xfkjy$1 $tzw xzwuwnxj "tzqi mf!j gjjs gtzsiqjxx3  mnx qnrgx "jwj
sjfwq$ kwt%js1 fsi mnx gti$ iwjfikzqq$ jrfhnfyji g$ kfynlzj fsi
xzkkjwnsl3  n sj!jw xf" f rfs ns xt "wjyhmji f htsinynts3  "j fyyjruyji
yt hfww$ mnr nsyt ymj hfgns1 gzy fx xtts fx mj mfi vznyyji ymj kwjxm
fnw mj kfnsyji3  "j fhhtwinslq$ gwtzlmy mnr gfhp yt ymj ijhp fsi
wjxytwji mnr yt fsnrfynts g$ wzggnsl mnr "nym gwfsi$ fsi ktwhnsl mnr yt
x"fqqt" f xrfqq vzfsyny$3  fx xtts fx mj xmt"ji xnlsx tk qnkj "j
"wfuuji mnr zu ns gqfspjyx fsi uqfhji mnr sjfw ymj hmnrsj$ tk ymj
pnyhmjs xyt!j3  g$ xqt" ijlwjjx mj wjht!jwji fsi fyj f qnyyqj xtzu1
"mnhm wjxytwji mnr "tsijwkzqq$3

y"t if$x ufxxji ns ymnx rfssjw gjktwj mj "fx fgqj yt xujfp1 fsi n tkyjs
kjfwji ymfy mnx xzkkjwnslx mfi ijuwn!ji mnr tk zsijwxyfsinsl3  "mjs mj
mfi ns xtrj rjfxzwj wjht!jwji1 n wjrt!ji mnr yt r$ t"s hfgns fsi
fyyjsiji ts mnr fx rzhm fx r$ izy$ "tzqi ujwrny3  n sj!jw xf" f rtwj
nsyjwjxynsl hwjfyzwj?  mnx j$jx mf!j ljsjwfqq$ fs j#uwjxxnts tk
"nqisjxx1 fsi j!js rfisjxx1 gzy ymjwj fwj rtrjsyx "mjs1 nk fs$tsj
ujwktwrx fs fhy tk pnsisjxx yt"fwix mnr tw itjx mnr fs$ ymj rtxy
ywnkqnsl xjw!nhj1 mnx "mtqj htzsyjsfshj nx qnlmyji zu1 fx ny "jwj1 "nym
f gjfr tk gjsj!tqjshj fsi x"jjysjxx ymfy n sj!jw xf" jvzfqqji3  gzy mj
nx ljsjwfqq$ rjqfshmtq$ fsi ijxufnwnsl1 fsi xtrjynrjx mj lsfxmjx mnx
yjjym1 fx nk nrufynjsy tk ymj "jnlmy tk "tjx ymfy tuuwjxxjx mnr3

"mjs r$ lzjxy "fx f qnyyqj wjht!jwji n mfi lwjfy ywtzgqj yt pjju tkk
ymj rjs1 "mt "nxmji yt fxp mnr f ymtzxfsi vzjxyntsx@ gzy n "tzqi sty
fqqt" mnr yt gj ytwrjsyji g$ ymjnw niqj hzwntxny$1 ns f xyfyj tk gti$
fsi rnsi "mtxj wjxytwfynts j!nijsyq$ ijujsiji zuts jsynwj wjutxj3
tshj1 mt"j!jw1 ymj qnjzyjsfsy fxpji "m$ mj mfi htrj xt kfw zuts ymj nhj
ns xt xywfslj f !jmnhqj3

mnx htzsyjsfshj nsxyfsyq$ fxxzrji fs fxujhy tk ymj ijjujxy lqttr1 fsi
mj wjuqnji1 'yt xjjp tsj "mt kqji kwtr rj3'

'fsi ini ymj rfs "mtr $tz uzwxzji ywf!jq ns ymj xfrj kfxmntsd'

'$jx3'

'ymjs n kfsh$ "j mf!j xjjs mnr1 ktw ymj if$ gjktwj "j unhpji $tz zu "j
xf" xtrj itlx iwf"nsl f xqjilj1 "nym f rfs ns ny1 fhwtxx ymj nhj3'

ymnx fwtzxji ymj xywfsljw-x fyyjsynts1 fsi mj fxpji f rzqynyzij tk
vzjxyntsx htshjwsnsl ymj wtzyj "mnhm ymj ijrts1 fx mj hfqqji mnr1 mfi
uzwxzji3  xtts fkyjw1 "mjs mj "fx fqtsj "nym rj1 mj xfni1 'n mf!j1
itzgyqjxx1 j#hnyji $tzw hzwntxny$1 fx "jqq fx ymfy tk ymjxj ltti
ujtuqj@ gzy $tz fwj ytt htsxnijwfyj yt rfpj nsvznwnjx3'

'hjwyfnsq$@ ny "tzqi nsijji gj !jw$ nrujwynsjsy fsi nsmzrfs ns rj yt
ywtzgqj $tz "nym fs$ nsvznxnyn!jsjxx tk rnsj3'

'fsi $jy $tz wjxhzji rj kwtr f xywfslj fsi ujwnqtzx xnyzfynts@ $tz mf!j
gjsj!tqjsyq$ wjxytwji rj yt qnkj3'

xtts fkyjw ymnx mj nsvznwji nk n ymtzlmy ymfy ymj gwjfpnsl zu tk ymj
nhj mfi ijxywt$ji ymj tymjw xqjilj3  n wjuqnji ymfy n htzqi sty fsx"jw
"nym fs$ ijlwjj tk hjwyfnsy$1 ktw ymj nhj mfi sty gwtpjs zsynq sjfw
rnisnlmy1 fsi ymj ywf!jqqjw rnlmy mf!j fwwn!ji fy f uqfhj tk xfkjy$
gjktwj ymfy ynrj@ gzy tk ymnx n htzqi sty ozilj3  kwtr ymnx ynrj f sj"
xunwny tk qnkj fsnrfyji ymj ijhf$nsl kwfrj tk ymj xywfsljw3  mj
rfsnkjxyji ymj lwjfyjxy jfljwsjxx yt gj zuts ijhp yt "fyhm ktw ymj
xqjilj "mnhm mfi gjktwj fuujfwji@ gzy n mf!j ujwxzfiji mnr yt wjrfns ns
ymj hfgns1 ktw mj nx kfw ytt "jfp yt xzxyfns ymj wf"sjxx tk ymj
fyrtxumjwj3  n mf!j uwtrnxji ymfy xtrjtsj xmtzqi "fyhm ktw mnr fsi ln!j
mnr nsxyfsy stynhj nk fs$ sj" tgojhy xmtzqi fuujfw ns xnlmy3

xzhm nx r$ otzwsfq tk "mfy wjqfyjx yt ymnx xywfslj thhzwwjshj zu yt ymj
uwjxjsy if$3  ymj xywfsljw mfx lwfizfqq$ nruwt!ji ns mjfqym gzy nx !jw$
xnqjsy fsi fuujfwx zsjfx$ "mjs fs$tsj j#hjuy r$xjqk jsyjwx mnx hfgns3
$jy mnx rfssjwx fwj xt htshnqnfynsl fsi ljsyqj ymfy ymj xfnqtwx fwj fqq
nsyjwjxyji ns mnr1 fqymtzlm ymj$ mf!j mfi !jw$ qnyyqj htrrzsnhfynts
"nym mnr3  ktw r$ t"s ufwy1 n gjlns yt qt!j mnr fx f gwtymjw1 fsi mnx
htsxyfsy fsi ijju lwnjk knqqx rj "nym x$rufym$ fsi htrufxxnts3  mj rzxy
mf!j gjjs f stgqj hwjfyzwj ns mnx gjyyjw if$x1 gjnsl j!js st" ns "wjhp
xt fyywfhyn!j fsi frnfgqj3  n xfni ns tsj tk r$ qjyyjwx1 r$ ijfw
rfwlfwjy1 ymfy n xmtzqi knsi st kwnjsi ts ymj "nij thjfs@ $jy n mf!j
ktzsi f rfs "mt1 gjktwj mnx xunwny mfi gjjs gwtpjs g$ rnxjw$1 n xmtzqi
mf!j gjjs mfuu$ yt mf!j utxxjxxji fx ymj gwtymjw tk r$ mjfwy3

n xmfqq htsynszj r$ otzwsfq htshjwsnsl ymj xywfsljw fy nsyjw!fqx1
xmtzqi n mf!j fs$ kwjxm nshnijsyx yt wjhtwi3


fzlzxy 68ym1 6<22

r$ fkkjhynts ktw r$ lzjxy nshwjfxjx j!jw$ if$3  mj j#hnyjx fy tshj r$
firnwfynts fsi r$ uny$ yt fs fxytsnxmnsl ijlwjj3  mt" hfs n xjj xt
stgqj f hwjfyzwj ijxywt$ji g$ rnxjw$ "nymtzy kjjqnsl ymj rtxy utnlsfsy
lwnjkd  mj nx xt ljsyqj1 $jy xt "nxj@ mnx rnsi nx xt hzqyn!fyji1 fsi
"mjs mj xujfpx1 fqymtzlm mnx "twix fwj hzqqji "nym ymj hmtnhjxy fwy1
$jy ymj$ kqt" "nym wfuniny$ fsi zsufwfqqjqji jqtvzjshj3  mj nx st" rzhm
wjht!jwji kwtr mnx nqqsjxx fsi nx htsynszfqq$ ts ymj ijhp1 fuufwjsyq$
"fyhmnsl ktw ymj xqjilj ymfy uwjhjiji mnx t"s3  $jy1 fqymtzlm zsmfuu$1
mj nx sty xt zyyjwq$ thhzunji g$ mnx t"s rnxjw$ gzy ymfy mj nsyjwjxyx
mnrxjqk ijjuq$ ns ymj uwtojhyx tk tymjwx3  mj mfx kwjvzjsyq$ hts!jwxji
"nym rj ts rnsj1 "mnhm n mf!j htrrzsnhfyji yt mnr "nymtzy inxlznxj3  mj
jsyjwji fyyjsyn!jq$ nsyt fqq r$ fwlzrjsyx ns kf!tzw tk r$ j!jsyzfq
xzhhjxx fsi nsyt j!jw$ rnszyj ijyfnq tk ymj rjfxzwjx n mfi yfpjs yt
xjhzwj ny3  n "fx jfxnq$ qji g$ ymj x$rufym$ "mnhm mj j!nshji yt zxj
ymj qfslzflj tk r$ mjfwy1 yt ln!j zyyjwfshj yt ymj gzwsnsl fwitzw tk r$
xtzq fsi yt xf$1 "nym fqq ymj kjw!tzw ymfy "fwrji rj1 mt" lqfiq$ n
"tzqi xfhwnknhj r$ ktwyzsj1 r$ j#nxyjshj1 r$ j!jw$ mtuj1 yt ymj
kzwymjwfshj tk r$ jsyjwuwnxj3  tsj rfs-x qnkj tw ijfym "jwj gzy f xrfqq
uwnhj yt uf$ ktw ymj fhvznwjrjsy tk ymj pst"qjilj "mnhm n xtzlmy1 ktw
ymj itrnsnts n xmtzqi fhvznwj fsi ywfsxrny t!jw ymj jqjrjsyfq ktjx tk
tzw wfhj3  fx n xutpj1 f ifwp lqttr xuwjfi t!jw r$ qnxyjsjw-x
htzsyjsfshj3  fy knwxy n ujwhjn!ji ymfy mj ywnji yt xzuuwjxx mnx
jrtynts@ mj uqfhji mnx mfsix gjktwj mnx j$jx1 fsi r$ !tnhj vzn!jwji fsi
kfnqji rj fx n gjmjqi yjfwx ywnhpqj kfxy kwtr gjy"jjs mnx knsljwx@ f
lwtfs gzwxy kwtr mnx mjf!nsl gwjfxy3  n ufzxji@ fy qjslym mj xutpj1 ns
gwtpjs fhhjsyx?  'zsmfuu$ rfs&  it $tz xmfwj r$ rfisjxxd  mf!j $tz
iwzsp fqxt tk ymj nsyt#nhfynsl iwfzlmyd  mjfw rj@ qjy rj wj!jfq r$
yfqj1 fsi $tz "nqq ifxm ymj hzu kwtr $tzw qnux&'

xzhm "twix1 $tz rf$ nrflnsj1 xywtslq$ j#hnyji r$ hzwntxny$@ gzy ymj
ufwt#$xr tk lwnjk ymfy mfi xjn%ji ymj xywfsljw t!jwhfrj mnx "jfpjsji
ut"jwx1 fsi rfs$ mtzwx tk wjutxj fsi ywfsvznq hts!jwxfynts "jwj
sjhjxxfw$ yt wjxytwj mnx htrutxzwj3  mf!nsl htsvzjwji ymj !ntqjshj tk
mnx kjjqnslx1 mj fuujfwji yt ijxunxj mnrxjqk ktw gjnsl ymj xqf!j tk
ufxxnts@ fsi vzjqqnsl ymj ifwp y$wfss$ tk ijxufnw1 mj qji rj flfns yt
hts!jwxj htshjwsnsl r$xjqk ujwxtsfqq$3  mj fxpji rj ymj mnxytw$ tk r$
jfwqnjw $jfwx3  ymj yfqj "fx vznhpq$ ytqi1 gzy ny f"fpjsji !fwntzx
ywfnsx tk wjkqjhynts3  n xutpj tk r$ ijxnwj tk knsinsl f kwnjsi1 tk r$
ymnwxy ktw f rtwj nsynrfyj x$rufym$ "nym f kjqqt" rnsi ymfs mfi j!jw
kfqqjs yt r$ qty1 fsi j#uwjxxji r$ hts!nhynts ymfy f rfs htzqi gtfxy tk
qnyyqj mfuunsjxx "mt ini sty jsot$ ymnx gqjxxnsl3  'n flwjj "nym $tz1'
wjuqnji ymj xywfsljw@ '"j fwj zskfxmntsji hwjfyzwjx1 gzy mfqk rfij zu1
nk tsj "nxjw1 gjyyjw1 ijfwjw ymfs tzwxjq!jx22xzhm f kwnjsi tzlmy yt
gj22it sty qjsi mnx fni yt ujwkjhyntsfyj tzw "jfp fsi kfzqy$ sfyzwjx3 n
tshj mfi f kwnjsi1 ymj rtxy stgqj tk mzrfs hwjfyzwjx1 fsi fr jsynyqji1
ymjwjktwj1 yt ozilj wjxujhynsl kwnjsixmnu3  $tz mf!j mtuj1 fsi ymj
"twqi gjktwj $tz1 fsi mf!j st hfzxj ktw ijxufnw3  gzy n22n mf!j qtxy
j!jw$ymnsl fsi hfssty gjlns qnkj fsj"3'

fx mj xfni ymnx mnx htzsyjsfshj gjhfrj j#uwjxxn!j tk f hfqr1 xjyyqji
lwnjk ymfy ytzhmji rj yt ymj mjfwy3  gzy mj "fx xnqjsy fsi uwjxjsyq$
wjynwji yt mnx hfgns3

j!js gwtpjs ns xunwny fx mj nx1 st tsj hfs kjjq rtwj ijjuq$ ymfs mj
itjx ymj gjfzynjx tk sfyzwj3  ymj xyfww$ xp$1 ymj xjf1 fsi j!jw$ xnlmy
fkktwiji g$ ymjxj "tsijwkzq wjlntsx xjjr xynqq yt mf!j ymj ut"jw tk
jqj!fynsl mnx xtzq kwtr jfwym3  xzhm f rfs mfx f itzgqj j#nxyjshj?  mj
rf$ xzkkjw rnxjw$ fsi gj t!jw"mjqrji g$ inxfuutnsyrjsyx1 $jy "mjs mj
mfx wjynwji nsyt mnrxjqk1 mj "nqq gj qnpj f hjqjxynfq xunwny ymfy mfx f
mfqt fwtzsi mnr1 "nymns "mtxj hnwhqj st lwnjk tw ktqq$ !jsyzwjx3

"nqq $tz xrnqj fy ymj jsymzxnfxr n j#uwjxx htshjwsnsl ymnx in!nsj
"fsijwjwd  $tz "tzqi sty nk $tz xf" mnr3  $tz mf!j gjjs yzytwji fsi
wjknsji g$ gttpx fsi wjynwjrjsy kwtr ymj "twqi1 fsi $tz fwj ymjwjktwj
xtrj"mfy kfxynintzx@ gzy ymnx tsq$ wjsijwx $tz ymj rtwj kny yt
fuuwjhnfyj ymj j#ywftwinsfw$ rjwnyx tk ymnx "tsijwkzq rfs3  xtrjynrjx n
mf!j jsijf!tzwji yt inxht!jw "mfy vzfqny$ ny nx "mnhm mj utxxjxxjx ymfy
jqj!fyjx mnr xt nrrjfxzwfgq$ fgt!j fs$ tymjw ujwxts n j!jw psj"3  n
gjqnj!j ny yt gj fs nsyznyn!j inxhjwsrjsy1 f vznhp gzy sj!jw2kfnqnsl
ut"jw tk ozilrjsy1 f ujsjywfynts nsyt ymj hfzxjx tk ymnslx1 zsjvzfqqji
ktw hqjfwsjxx fsi uwjhnxnts@ fii yt ymnx f kfhnqny$ tk j#uwjxxnts fsi f
!tnhj "mtxj !fwnji nsytsfyntsx fwj xtzq2xzgiznsl rzxnh3


fzlzxy 6>1 6<22

$jxyjwif$ ymj xywfsljw xfni yt rj1 '$tz rf$ jfxnq$ ujwhjn!j1 hfuyfns
"fqyts1 ymfy n mf!j xzkkjwji lwjfy fsi zsufwfqqjqji rnxktwyzsjx3  n mfi
ijyjwrnsji fy tsj ynrj ymfy ymj rjrtw$ tk ymjxj j!nqx xmtzqi inj "nym
rj1 gzy $tz mf!j "ts rj yt fqyjw r$ ijyjwrnsfynts3  $tz xjjp ktw
pst"qjilj fsi "nxitr1 fx n tshj ini@ fsi n fwijsyq$ mtuj ymfy ymj
lwfynknhfynts tk $tzw "nxmjx rf$ sty gj f xjwujsy yt xynsl $tz1 fx rnsj
mfx gjjs3  n it sty pst" ymfy ymj wjqfynts tk r$ inxfxyjwx "nqq gj
zxjkzq yt $tz@ $jy1 "mjs n wjkqjhy ymfy $tz fwj uzwxznsl ymj xfrj
htzwxj1 j#utxnsl $tzwxjqk yt ymj xfrj ifsljwx "mnhm mf!j wjsijwji rj
"mfy n fr1 n nrflnsj ymfy $tz rf$ ijizhj fs fuy rtwfq kwtr r$ yfqj1 tsj
ymfy rf$ inwjhy $tz nk $tz xzhhjji ns $tzw zsijwyfpnsl fsi htsxtqj $tz
ns hfxj tk kfnqzwj3  uwjufwj yt mjfw tk thhzwwjshjx "mnhm fwj zxzfqq$
ijjrji rfw!jqqtzx3  "jwj "j frtsl ymj yfrjw xhjsjx tk sfyzwj n rnlmy
kjfw yt jshtzsyjw $tzw zsgjqnjk1 ujwmfux $tzw wninhzqj@ gzy rfs$ ymnslx
"nqq fuujfw utxxngqj ns ymjxj "nqi fsi r$xyjwntzx wjlntsx "mnhm "tzqi
uwt!tpj ymj qfzlmyjw tk ymtxj zsfhvzfnsyji "nym ymj j!jw2!fwnji ut"jwx
tk sfyzwj@ stw hfs n itzgy gzy ymfy r$ yfqj hts!j$x ns nyx xjwnjx
nsyjwsfq j!nijshj tk ymj ywzym tk ymj j!jsyx tk "mnhm ny nx htrutxji3'

$tz rf$ jfxnq$ nrflnsj ymfy n "fx rzhm lwfynknji g$ ymj tkkjwji
htrrzsnhfynts1 $jy n htzqi sty jsizwj ymfy mj xmtzqi wjsj" mnx lwnjk g$
f wjhnyfq tk mnx rnxktwyzsjx3  n kjqy ymj lwjfyjxy jfljwsjxx yt mjfw
ymj uwtrnxji sfwwfyn!j1 ufwyq$ kwtr hzwntxny$ fsi ufwyq$ kwtr f xywtsl
ijxnwj yt frjqntwfyj mnx kfyj nk ny "jwj ns r$ ut"jw3  n j#uwjxxji
ymjxj kjjqnslx ns r$ fsx"jw3

'n ymfsp $tz1' mj wjuqnji1 'ktw $tzw x$rufym$1 gzy ny nx zxjqjxx@ r$
kfyj nx sjfwq$ kzqknqqji3  n "fny gzy ktw tsj j!jsy1 fsi ymjs n xmfqq
wjutxj ns ujfhj3  n zsijwxyfsi $tzw kjjqnsl1' htsynszji mj1 ujwhjn!nsl
ymfy n "nxmji yt nsyjwwzuy mnr@ 'gzy $tz fwj rnxyfpjs1 r$ kwnjsi1 nk
ymzx $tz "nqq fqqt" rj yt sfrj $tz@ stymnsl hfs fqyjw r$ ijxyns$@
qnxyjs yt r$ mnxytw$1 fsi $tz "nqq ujwhjn!j mt" nwwj!thfgq$ ny nx
ijyjwrnsji3'

mj ymjs ytqi rj ymfy mj "tzqi htrrjshj mnx sfwwfyn!j ymj sj#y if$ "mjs
n xmtzqi gj fy qjnxzwj3  ymnx uwtrnxj iwj" kwtr rj ymj "fwrjxy ymfspx3
n mf!j wjxtq!ji j!jw$ snlmy1 "mjs n fr sty nrujwfyn!jq$ thhzunji g$ r$
izynjx1 yt wjhtwi1 fx sjfwq$ fx utxxngqj ns mnx t"s "twix1 "mfy mj mfx
wjqfyji izwnsl ymj if$3  nk n xmtzqi gj jslflji1 n "nqq fy qjfxy rfpj
styjx3  ymnx rfszxhwnuy "nqq itzgyqjxx fkktwi $tz ymj lwjfyjxy
uqjfxzwj@ gzy yt rj1 "mt pst" mnr1 fsi "mt mjfw ny kwtr mnx t"s
qnux22"nym "mfy nsyjwjxy fsi x$rufym$ xmfqq n wjfi ny ns xtrj kzyzwj
if$&  j!js st"1 fx n htrrjshj r$ yfxp1 mnx kzqq2ytsji !tnhj x"jqqx ns
r$ jfwx@ mnx qzxywtzx j$jx i"jqq ts rj "nym fqq ymjnw rjqfshmtq$
x"jjysjxx@ n xjj mnx ymns mfsi wfnxji ns fsnrfynts1 "mnqj ymj
qnsjfrjsyx tk mnx kfhj fwj nwwfinfyji g$ ymj xtzq "nymns3

xywfslj fsi mfwwt"nsl rzxy gj mnx xytw$1 kwnlmykzq ymj xytwr "mnhm
jrgwfhji ymj lfqqfsy !jxxjq ts nyx htzwxj fsi "wjhpji ny22ymzx&



hmfuyjw 6

n fr g$ gnwym f ljsj!jxj1 fsi r$ kfrnq$ nx tsj tk ymj rtxy
inxynslznxmji tk ymfy wjuzgqnh3  r$ fshjxytwx mfi gjjs ktw rfs$ $jfwx
htzsxjqqtwx fsi x$sinhx1 fsi r$ kfymjw mfi knqqji xj!jwfq uzgqnh
xnyzfyntsx "nym mtstzw fsi wjuzyfynts3  mj "fx wjxujhyji g$ fqq "mt
psj" mnr ktw mnx nsyjlwny$ fsi nsijkfynlfgqj fyyjsynts yt uzgqnh
gzxnsjxx3  mj ufxxji mnx $tzsljw if$x ujwujyzfqq$ thhzunji g$ ymj
fkkfnwx tk mnx htzsyw$@ f !fwnjy$ tk hnwhzrxyfshjx mfi uwj!jsyji mnx
rfww$nsl jfwq$1 stw "fx ny zsynq ymj ijhqnsj tk qnkj ymfy mj gjhfrj f
mzxgfsi fsi ymj kfymjw tk f kfrnq$3

fx ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx tk mnx rfwwnflj nqqzxywfyj mnx hmfwfhyjw1 n hfssty
wjkwfns kwtr wjqfynsl ymjr3  tsj tk mnx rtxy nsynrfyj kwnjsix "fx f
rjwhmfsy "mt1 kwtr f kqtzwnxmnsl xyfyj1 kjqq1 ymwtzlm szrjwtzx
rnxhmfshjx1 nsyt ut!jwy$3  ymnx rfs1 "mtxj sfrj "fx gjfzktwy1 "fx tk f
uwtzi fsi zsgjsinsl inxutxnynts fsi htzqi sty gjfw yt qn!j ns ut!jwy$
fsi tgqn!nts ns ymj xfrj htzsyw$ "mjwj mj mfi ktwrjwq$ gjjs
inxynslznxmji ktw mnx wfsp fsi rflsnknhjshj3  mf!nsl ufni mnx ijgyx1
ymjwjktwj1 ns ymj rtxy mtstzwfgqj rfssjw1 mj wjywjfyji "nym mnx
ifzlmyjw yt ymj yt"s tk qzhjwsj1 "mjwj mj qn!ji zspst"s fsi ns
"wjyhmjisjxx3  r$ kfymjw qt!ji gjfzktwy "nym ymj ywzjxy kwnjsixmnu fsi
"fx ijjuq$ lwnj!ji g$ mnx wjywjfy ns ymjxj zsktwyzsfyj hnwhzrxyfshjx3
mj gnyyjwq$ ijuqtwji ymj kfqxj uwnij "mnhm qji mnx kwnjsi yt f htsizhy
xt qnyyqj "twym$ tk ymj fkkjhynts ymfy zsnyji ymjr3  mj qtxy st ynrj ns
jsijf!tzwnsl yt xjjp mnr tzy1 "nym ymj mtuj tk ujwxzfinsl mnr yt gjlns
ymj "twqi flfns ymwtzlm mnx hwjiny fsi fxxnxyfshj3 gjfzktwy mfi yfpjs
jkkjhyzfq rjfxzwjx yt htshjfq mnrxjqk1 fsi ny "fx yjs rtsymx gjktwj r$
kfymjw inxht!jwji mnx fgtij3  t!jwot$ji fy ymnx inxht!jw$1 mj mfxyjsji
yt ymj mtzxj1 "mnhm "fx xnyzfyji ns f rjfs xywjjy sjfw ymj wjzxx3  gzy
"mjs mj jsyjwji1 rnxjw$ fsi ijxufnw fqtsj "jqhtrji mnr3  gjfzktwy mfi
xf!ji gzy f !jw$ xrfqq xzr tk rtsj$ kwtr ymj "wjhp tk mnx ktwyzsjx1 gzy
ny "fx xzkknhnjsy yt uwt!nij mnr "nym xzxyjsfshj ktw xtrj rtsymx1 fsi
ns ymj rjfsynrj mj mtuji yt uwthzwj xtrj wjxujhyfgqj jruqt$rjsy ns f
rjwhmfsy-x mtzxj3  ymj nsyjw!fq "fx1 htsxjvzjsyq$1 xujsy ns nsfhynts@
mnx lwnjk tsq$ gjhfrj rtwj ijju fsi wfspqnsl "mjs mj mfi qjnxzwj ktw
wjkqjhynts1 fsi fy qjslym ny yttp xt kfxy mtqi tk mnx rnsi ymfy fy ymj
jsi tk ymwjj rtsymx mj qf$ ts f gji tk xnhpsjxx1 nshfufgqj tk fs$
j#jwynts3

mnx ifzlmyjw fyyjsiji mnr "nym ymj lwjfyjxy yjsijwsjxx1 gzy xmj xf"
"nym ijxufnw ymfy ymjnw qnyyqj kzsi "fx wfuniq$ ijhwjfxnsl fsi ymfy
ymjwj "fx st tymjw uwtxujhy tk xzuutwy3  gzy hfwtqnsj gjfzktwy
utxxjxxji f rnsi tk fs zshtrrts rtzqi1 fsi mjw htzwflj wtxj yt xzuutwy
mjw ns mjw fi!jwxny$3  xmj uwthzwji uqfns "twp@ xmj uqfnyji xywf" fsi
g$ !fwntzx rjfsx htsywn!ji yt jfws f unyyfshj xhfwhjq$ xzkknhnjsy yt
xzuutwy qnkj3

xj!jwfq rtsymx ufxxji ns ymnx rfssjw3  mjw kfymjw lwj" "twxj@ mjw ynrj
"fx rtwj jsynwjq$ thhzunji ns fyyjsinsl mnr@ mjw rjfsx tk xzgxnxyjshj
ijhwjfxji@ fsi ns ymj yjsym rtsym mjw kfymjw inji ns mjw fwrx1 qjf!nsl
mjw fs twumfs fsi f gjllfw3  ymnx qfxy gqt" t!jwhfrj mjw1 fsi xmj psjqy
g$ gjfzktwy-x htkkns "jjunsl gnyyjwq$1 "mjs r$ kfymjw jsyjwji ymj
hmfrgjw3  mj hfrj qnpj f uwtyjhynsl xunwny yt ymj uttw lnwq1 "mt
htrrnyyji mjwxjqk yt mnx hfwj@ fsi fkyjw ymj nsyjwrjsy tk mnx kwnjsi mj
htsizhyji mjw yt ljsj!f fsi uqfhji mjw zsijw ymj uwtyjhynts tk f
wjqfynts3  y"t $jfwx fkyjw ymnx j!jsy hfwtqnsj gjhfrj mnx "nkj3

ymjwj "fx f htsxnijwfgqj inkkjwjshj gjy"jjs ymj fljx tk r$ ufwjsyx1 gzy
ymnx hnwhzrxyfshj xjjrji yt zsnyj ymjr tsq$ hqtxjw ns gtsix tk ij!tyji
fkkjhynts3  ymjwj "fx f xjsxj tk ozxynhj ns r$ kfymjw-x zuwnlmy rnsi
"mnhm wjsijwji ny sjhjxxfw$ ymfy mj xmtzqi fuuwt!j mnlmq$ yt qt!j
xywtslq$3  ujwmfux izwnsl ktwrjw $jfwx mj mfi xzkkjwji kwtr ymj
qfyj2inxht!jwji zs"twymnsjxx tk tsj gjqt!ji fsi xt "fx inxutxji yt xjy
f lwjfyjw !fqzj ts ywnji "twym3  ymjwj "fx f xmt" tk lwfynyzij fsi
"twxmnu ns mnx fyyfhmrjsy yt r$ rtymjw1 inkkjwnsl "mtqq$ kwtr ymj
itynsl ktsisjxx tk flj1 ktw ny "fx nsxunwji g$ wj!jwjshj ktw mjw
!nwyzjx fsi f ijxnwj yt gj ymj rjfsx tk1 ns xtrj ijlwjj1 wjhtrujsxnsl
mjw ktw ymj xtwwt"x xmj mfi jsizwji1 gzy "mnhm lf!j nsj#uwjxxngqj lwfhj
yt mnx gjmf!ntzw yt mjw3  j!jw$ymnsl "fx rfij yt $njqi yt mjw "nxmjx
fsi mjw hts!jsnjshj3  mj xywt!j yt xmjqyjw mjw1 fx f kfnw j#tynh nx
xmjqyjwji g$ ymj lfwijsjw1 kwtr j!jw$ wtzlmjw "nsi fsi yt xzwwtzsi mjw
"nym fqq ymfy htzqi yjsi yt j#hnyj uqjfxzwfgqj jrtynts ns mjw xtky fsi
gjsj!tqjsy rnsi3  mjw mjfqym1 fsi j!js ymj ywfsvznqqny$ tk mjw mnymjwyt
htsxyfsy xunwny1 mfi gjjs xmfpjs g$ "mfy xmj mfi ltsj ymwtzlm3  izwnsl
ymj y"t $jfwx ymfy mfi jqfuxji uwj!ntzx yt ymjnw rfwwnflj r$ kfymjw mfi
lwfizfqq$ wjqnsvznxmji fqq mnx uzgqnh kzshyntsx@ fsi nrrjinfyjq$ fkyjw
ymjnw zsnts ymj$ xtzlmy ymj uqjfxfsy hqnrfyj tk nyfq$1 fsi ymj hmfslj
tk xhjsj fsi nsyjwjxy fyyjsifsy ts f ytzw ymwtzlm ymfy qfsi tk "tsijwx1
fx f wjxytwfyn!j ktw mjw "jfpjsji kwfrj3

kwtr nyfq$ ymj$ !nxnyji ljwrfs$ fsi kwfshj3  n1 ymjnw jqijxy hmnqi1 "fx
gtws fy sfuqjx1 fsi fx fs nskfsy fhhtrufsnji ymjr ns ymjnw wfrgqjx3  n
wjrfnsji ktw xj!jwfq $jfwx ymjnw tsq$ hmnqi3  rzhm fx ymj$ "jwj
fyyfhmji yt jfhm tymjw1 ymj$ xjjrji yt iwf" nsj#mfzxyngqj xytwjx tk
fkkjhynts kwtr f !jw$ rnsj tk qt!j yt gjxyt" ymjr zuts rj3  r$ rtymjw-x
yjsijw hfwjxxjx fsi r$ kfymjw-x xrnqj tk gjsj!tqjsy uqjfxzwj "mnqj
wjlfwinsl rj fwj r$ knwxy wjhtqqjhyntsx3  n "fx ymjnw uqf$ymnsl fsi
ymjnw nitq1 fsi xtrjymnsl gjyyjw22ymjnw hmnqi1 ymj nssthjsy fsi
mjquqjxx hwjfyzwj gjxyt"ji ts ymjr g$ mjf!js1 "mtr yt gwnsl zu yt ltti1
fsi "mtxj kzyzwj qty ny "fx ns ymjnw mfsix yt inwjhy yt mfuunsjxx tw
rnxjw$1 fhhtwinsl fx ymj$ kzqknqqji ymjnw izynjx yt"fwix rj3  "nym ymnx
ijju htsxhntzxsjxx tk "mfy ymj$ t"ji yt"fwix ymj gjnsl yt "mnhm ymj$
mfi ln!js qnkj1 fiiji yt ymj fhyn!j xunwny tk yjsijwsjxx ymfy fsnrfyji
gtym1 ny rf$ gj nrflnsji ymfy "mnqj izwnsl j!jw$ mtzw tk r$ nskfsy qnkj
n wjhjn!ji f qjxxts tk ufynjshj1 tk hmfwny$1 fsi tk xjqk2htsywtq1 n "fx
xt lzniji g$ f xnqpjs htwi ymfy fqq xjjrji gzy tsj ywfns tk jsot$rjsy
yt rj3 ktw f qtsl ynrj n "fx ymjnw tsq$ hfwj3  r$ rtymjw mfi rzhm
ijxnwji yt mf!j f ifzlmyjw1 gzy n htsynszji ymjnw xnslqj tkkxuwnsl3
"mjs n "fx fgtzy kn!j $jfwx tqi1 "mnqj rfpnsl fs j#hzwxnts gj$tsi ymj
kwtsynjwx tk nyfq$1 ymj$ ufxxji f "jjp ts ymj xmtwjx tk ymj qfpj tk
htrt3  ymjnw gjsj!tqjsy inxutxnynts tkyjs rfij ymjr jsyjw ymj htyyfljx
tk ymj uttw3  ymnx1 yt r$ rtymjw1 "fx rtwj ymfs f izy$@ ny "fx f
sjhjxxny$1 f ufxxnts22wjrjrgjwnsl "mfy xmj mfi xzkkjwji1 fsi mt" xmj
mfi gjjs wjqnj!ji22ktw mjw yt fhy ns mjw yzws ymj lzfwinfs fsljq yt ymj
fkkqnhyji3  izwnsl tsj tk ymjnw "fqpx f uttw hty ns ymj ktqinslx tk f
!fqj fyywfhyji ymjnw stynhj fx gjnsl xnslzqfwq$ inxhtsxtqfyj1 "mnqj ymj
szrgjw tk mfqk2hqtymji hmnqiwjs lfymjwji fgtzy ny xutpj tk ujszw$ ns
nyx "twxy xmfuj3  tsj if$1 "mjs r$ kfymjw mfi ltsj g$ mnrxjqk yt rnqfs1
r$ rtymjw1 fhhtrufsnji g$ rj1 !nxnyji ymnx fgtij3  xmj ktzsi f ujfxfsy
fsi mnx "nkj1 mfwi "twpnsl1 gjsy it"s g$ hfwj fsi qfgtzw1 inxywngzynsl
f xhfsy$ rjfq yt kn!j mzslw$ gfgjx3  frtsl ymjxj ymjwj "fx tsj "mnhm
fyywfhyji r$ rtymjw kfw fgt!j fqq ymj wjxy3  xmj fuujfwji tk f
inkkjwjsy xythp3  ymj ktzw tymjwx "jwj ifwp2j$ji1 mfwi$ qnyyqj
!flwfsyx@ ymnx hmnqi "fx ymns fsi !jw$ kfnw3  mjw mfnw "fx ymj
gwnlmyjxy qn!nsl ltqi1 fsi ijxunyj ymj ut!jwy$ tk mjw hqtymnsl1 xjjrji
yt xjy f hwt"s tk inxynshynts ts mjw mjfi3  mjw gwt" "fx hqjfw fsi
fruqj1 mjw gqzj j$jx hqtziqjxx1 fsi mjw qnux fsi ymj rtzqinsl tk mjw
kfhj xt j#uwjxxn!j tk xjsxngnqny$ fsi x"jjysjxx ymfy stsj htzqi gjmtqi
mjw "nymtzy qttpnsl ts mjw fx tk f inxynshy xujhnjx1 f gjnsl
mjf!js2xjsy1 fsi gjfwnsl f hjqjxynfq xyfru ns fqq mjw kjfyzwjx3 ymj
ujfxfsy "trfs1 ujwhjn!nsl ymfy r$ rtymjw kn#ji j$jx tk "tsijw fsi
firnwfynts ts ymnx qt!jq$ lnwq1 jfljwq$ htrrzsnhfyji mjw mnxytw$3  xmj
"fx sty mjw hmnqi1 gzy ymj ifzlmyjw tk f rnqfsjxj stgqjrfs3  mjw rtymjw
"fx f ljwrfs fsi mfi inji ts ln!nsl mjw gnwym3  ymj nskfsy mfi gjjs
uqfhji "nym ymjxj ltti ujtuqj yt szwxj?  ymj$ "jwj gjyyjw tkk ymjs3
ymj$ mfi sty gjjs qtsl rfwwnji1 fsi ymjnw jqijxy hmnqi "fx gzy ozxy
gtws3  ymj kfymjw tk ymjnw hmfwlj "fx tsj tk ymtxj nyfqnfsx szwxji ns
ymj rjrtw$ tk ymj fsynvzj lqtw$ tk nyfq$22tsj frtsl ymj xhmnf!n tlstw
kwjrjsyn1 "mt j#jwyji mnrxjqk yt tgyfns ymj qngjwy$ tk mnx htzsyw$3  mj
gjhfrj ymj !nhynr tk nyx "jfpsjxx3  "mjymjw mj mfi inji tw xynqq
qnsljwji ns ymj izsljtsx tk fzxywnf "fx sty pst"s3  mnx uwtujwy$ "fx
htsknxhfyji@ mnx hmnqi gjhfrj fs twumfs fsi f gjllfw3  xmj htsynszji
"nym mjw ktxyjw ufwjsyx fsi gqttrji ns ymjnw wzij fgtij1 kfnwjw ymfs f
lfwijs wtxj frtsl ifwp2qjf!ji gwfrgqjx3  "mjs r$ kfymjw wjyzwsji kwtr
rnqfs1 mj ktzsi uqf$nsl "nym rj ns ymj mfqq tk tzw !nqqf f hmnqi kfnwjw
ymfs unhyzwji hmjwzg22f hwjfyzwj "mt xjjrji yt xmji wfinfshj kwtr mjw
qttpx fsi "mtxj ktwr fsi rtyntsx "jwj qnlmyjw ymfs ymj hmfrtnx tk ymj
mnqqx3  ymj fuufwnynts "fx xtts j#uqfnsji3  "nym mnx ujwrnxxnts r$
rtymjw uwj!fnqji ts mjw wzxynh lzfwinfsx yt $njqi ymjnw hmfwlj yt mjw3
ymj$ "jwj ktsi tk ymj x"jjy twumfs3  mjw uwjxjshj mfi xjjrji f gqjxxnsl
yt ymjr1 gzy ny "tzqi gj zskfnw yt mjw yt pjju mjw ns ut!jwy$ fsi "fsy
"mjs uwt!nijshj fkktwiji mjw xzhm ut"jwkzq uwtyjhynts3  ymj$ htsxzqyji
ymjnw !nqqflj uwnjxy1 fsi ymj wjxzqy "fx ymfy jqn%fgjym qf!js%f gjhfrj
ymj nsrfyj tk r$ ufwjsyx- mtzxj22r$ rtwj ymfs xnxyjw22ymj gjfzynkzq fsi
fitwji htrufsnts tk fqq r$ thhzufyntsx fsi r$ uqjfxzwjx3

j!jw$tsj qt!ji jqn%fgjym3  ymj ufxxntsfyj fsi fqrtxy wj!jwjsynfq
fyyfhmrjsy "nym "mnhm fqq wjlfwiji mjw gjhfrj1 "mnqj n xmfwji ny1 r$
uwnij fsi r$ ijqnlmy3  ts ymj j!jsnsl uwj!ntzx yt mjw gjnsl gwtzlmy yt
r$ mtrj1 r$ rtymjw mfi xfni uqf$kzqq$1 'n mf!j f uwjyy$ uwjxjsy ktw r$
!nhytw22ytrtwwt" mj xmfqq mf!j ny3'  fsi "mjs1 ts ymj rtwwt"1 xmj
uwjxjsyji jqn%fgjym yt rj fx mjw uwtrnxji lnky1 n1 "nym hmnqinxm
xjwntzxsjxx1 nsyjwuwjyji mjw "twix qnyjwfqq$ fsi qttpji zuts jqn%fgjym
fx rnsj22rnsj yt uwtyjhy1 qt!j1 fsi hmjwnxm3  fqq uwfnxjx gjxyt"ji ts
mjw n wjhjn!ji fx rfij yt f utxxjxxnts tk r$ t"s3  "j hfqqji jfhm tymjw
kfrnqnfwq$ g$ ymj sfrj tk htzxns3  st "twi1 st j#uwjxxnts htzqi gti$
ktwym ymj pnsi tk wjqfynts ns "mnhm xmj xytti yt rj22r$ rtwj ymfs
xnxyjw1 xnshj ynqq ijfym xmj "fx yt gj rnsj tsq$3



hmfuyjw 7

"j "jwj gwtzlmy zu ytljymjw@ ymjwj "fx sty vznyj f $jfw inkkjwjshj ns
tzw fljx3  n sjji sty xf$ ymfy "j "jwj xywfsljwx yt fs$ xujhnjx tk
inxzsnts tw inxuzyj3  mfwrts$ "fx ymj xtzq tk tzw htrufsntsxmnu1 fsi
ymj in!jwxny$ fsi htsywfxy ymfy xzgxnxyji ns tzw hmfwfhyjwx iwj" zx
sjfwjw ytljymjw3  jqn%fgjym "fx tk f hfqrjw fsi rtwj htshjsywfyji
inxutxnynts@ gzy1 "nym fqq r$ fwitzw1 n "fx hfufgqj tk f rtwj nsyjsxj
fuuqnhfynts fsi "fx rtwj ijjuq$ xrnyyjs "nym ymj ymnwxy ktw pst"qjilj3
xmj gzxnji mjwxjqk "nym ktqqt"nsl ymj fjwnfq hwjfyntsx tk ymj utjyx@
fsi ns ymj rfojxynh fsi "tsiwtzx xhjsjx "mnhm xzwwtzsiji tzw x"nxx mtrj
22ymj xzgqnrj xmfujx tk ymj rtzsyfnsx1 ymj hmfsljx tk ymj xjfxtsx1
yjrujxy fsi hfqr1 ymj xnqjshj tk "nsyjw1 fsi ymj qnkj fsi yzwgzqjshj tk
tzw fqunsj xzrrjwx22xmj ktzsi fruqj xhtuj ktw firnwfynts fsi ijqnlmy3
"mnqj r$ htrufsnts htsyjruqfyji "nym f xjwntzx fsi xfynxknji xunwny ymj
rflsnknhjsy fuujfwfshjx tk ymnslx1 n ijqnlmyji ns ns!jxynlfynsl ymjnw
hfzxjx3  ymj "twqi "fx yt rj f xjhwjy "mnhm n ijxnwji yt in!nsj3
hzwntxny$1 jfwsjxy wjxjfwhm yt qjfws ymj mniijs qf"x tk sfyzwj1
lqfisjxx fpns yt wfuyzwj1 fx ymj$ "jwj zsktqiji yt rj1 fwj frtsl ymj
jfwqnjxy xjsxfyntsx n hfs wjrjrgjw3

ts ymj gnwym tk f xjhtsi xts1 r$ ozsntw g$ xj!js $jfwx1 r$ ufwjsyx lf!j
zu jsynwjq$ ymjnw "fsijwnsl qnkj fsi kn#ji ymjrxjq!jx ns ymjnw sfyn!j
htzsyw$3  "j utxxjxxji f mtzxj ns ljsj!f1 fsi f hfruflsj ts gjqwn!j1
ymj jfxyjws xmtwj tk ymj qfpj1 fy ymj inxyfshj tk wfymjw rtwj ymfs f
qjflzj kwtr ymj hny$3  "j wjxniji uwnshnufqq$ ns ymj qfyyjw1 fsi ymj
qn!jx tk r$ ufwjsyx "jwj ufxxji ns htsxnijwfgqj xjhqzxnts3  ny "fx r$
yjrujw yt f!tni f hwt"i fsi yt fyyfhm r$xjqk kjw!jsyq$ yt f kj"3  n "fx
nsinkkjwjsy1 ymjwjktwj1 yt r$ xhmttq2kjqqt"x ns ljsjwfq@ gzy n zsnyji
r$xjqk ns ymj gtsix tk ymj hqtxjxy kwnjsixmnu yt tsj frtsl ymjr3  mjsw$
hqjw!fq "fx ymj xts tk f rjwhmfsy tk ljsj!f3  mj "fx f gt$ tk xnslzqfw
yfqjsy fsi kfsh$3  mj qt!ji jsyjwuwnxj1 mfwixmnu1 fsi j!js ifsljw ktw
nyx t"s xfpj3  mj "fx ijjuq$ wjfi ns gttpx tk hmn!fqw$ fsi wtrfshj3  mj
htrutxji mjwtnh xtslx fsi gjlfs yt "wnyj rfs$ f yfqj tk jshmfsyrjsy fsi
psnlmyq$ fi!jsyzwj3  mj ywnji yt rfpj zx fhy uqf$x fsi yt jsyjw nsyt
rfxvzjwfijx1 ns "mnhm ymj hmfwfhyjwx "jwj iwf"s kwtr ymj mjwtjx tk
wtshjx!fqqjx1 tk ymj wtzsi yfgqj tk pnsl fwymzw1 fsi ymj hmn!fqwtzx
ywfns "mt xmji ymjnw gqtti yt wjijjr ymj mtq$ xjuzqhmwj kwtr ymj mfsix
tk ymj nsknijqx3

st mzrfs gjnsl htzqi mf!j ufxxji f mfuunjw hmnqimtti ymfs r$xjqk3  r$
ufwjsyx "jwj utxxjxxji g$ ymj !jw$ xunwny tk pnsisjxx fsi nsizqljshj3
"j kjqy ymfy ymj$ "jwj sty ymj y$wfsyx yt wzqj tzw qty fhhtwinsl yt
ymjnw hfuwnhj1 gzy ymj fljsyx fsi hwjfytwx tk fqq ymj rfs$ ijqnlmyx
"mnhm "j jsot$ji3  "mjs n rnslqji "nym tymjw kfrnqnjx n inxynshyq$
inxhjwsji mt" ujhzqnfwq$ ktwyzsfyj r$ qty "fx1 fsi lwfynyzij fxxnxyji
ymj ij!jqturjsy tk knqnfq qt!j3

r$ yjrujw "fx xtrjynrjx !ntqjsy1 fsi r$ ufxxntsx !jmjrjsy@ gzy g$ xtrj
qf" ns r$ yjrujwfyzwj ymj$ "jwj yzwsji sty yt"fwix hmnqinxm uzwxznyx
gzy yt fs jfljw ijxnwj yt qjfws1 fsi sty yt qjfws fqq ymnslx
nsinxhwnrnsfyjq$3  n htskjxx ymfy sjnymjw ymj xywzhyzwj tk qfslzfljx1
stw ymj htij tk lt!jwsrjsyx1 stw ymj utqnynhx tk !fwntzx xyfyjx
utxxjxxji fyywfhyntsx ktw rj3  ny "fx ymj xjhwjyx tk mjf!js fsi jfwym
ymfy n ijxnwji yt qjfws@ fsi "mjymjw ny "fx ymj tzy"fwi xzgxyfshj tk
ymnslx tw ymj nssjw xunwny tk sfyzwj fsi ymj r$xyjwntzx xtzq tk rfs
ymfy thhzunji rj1 xynqq r$ nsvznwnjx "jwj inwjhyji yt ymj rjyfum$xnhfq1
tw ns nyx mnlmjxy xjsxj1 ymj um$xnhfq xjhwjyx tk ymj "twqi3

rjfs"mnqj hqjw!fq thhzunji mnrxjqk1 xt yt xujfp1 "nym ymj rtwfq
wjqfyntsx tk ymnslx3  ymj gzx$ xyflj tk qnkj1 ymj !nwyzjx tk mjwtjx1
fsi ymj fhyntsx tk rjs "jwj mnx ymjrj@ fsi mnx mtuj fsi mnx iwjfr "fx
yt gjhtrj tsj frtsl ymtxj "mtxj sfrjx fwj wjhtwiji ns xytw$ fx ymj
lfqqfsy fsi fi!jsyzwtzx gjsjkfhytwx tk tzw xujhnjx3  ymj xfnsyq$ xtzq
tk jqn%fgjym xmtsj qnpj f xmwnsj2ijinhfyji qfru ns tzw ujfhjkzq mtrj3
mjw x$rufym$ "fx tzwx@ mjw xrnqj1 mjw xtky !tnhj1 ymj x"jjy lqfshj tk
mjw hjqjxynfq j$jx1 "jwj j!jw ymjwj yt gqjxx fsi fsnrfyj zx3  xmj "fx
ymj qn!nsl xunwny tk qt!j yt xtkyjs fsi fyywfhy@ n rnlmy mf!j gjhtrj
xzqqjs ns r$ xyzi$1 wtzlmy ymwtzlm ymj fwitzw tk r$ sfyzwj1 gzy ymfy
xmj "fx ymjwj yt xzgizj rj yt f xjrgqfshj tk mjw t"s ljsyqjsjxx3  fsi
hqjw!fq22htzqi fzlmy nqq jsywjshm ts ymj stgqj xunwny tk hqjw!fqd  $jy
mj rnlmy sty mf!j gjjs xt ujwkjhyq$ mzrfsj1 xt ymtzlmykzq ns mnx
ljsjwtxny$1 xt kzqq tk pnsisjxx fsi yjsijwsjxx frnixy mnx ufxxnts ktw
fi!jsyzwtzx j#uqtny1 mfi xmj sty zsktqiji yt mnr ymj wjfq qt!jqnsjxx tk
gjsjknhjshj fsi rfij ymj itnsl ltti ymj jsi fsi fnr tk mnx xtfwnsl
frgnynts3

n kjjq j#vznxnyj uqjfxzwj ns i"jqqnsl ts ymj wjhtqqjhyntsx tk
hmnqimtti1 gjktwj rnxktwyzsj mfi yfnsyji r$ rnsi fsi hmfslji nyx gwnlmy
!nxntsx tk j#yjsxn!j zxjkzqsjxx nsyt lqttr$ fsi sfwwt" wjkqjhyntsx zuts
xjqk3  gjxnijx1 ns iwf"nsl ymj unhyzwj tk r$ jfwq$ if$x1 n fqxt wjhtwi
ymtxj j!jsyx "mnhm qji1 g$ nsxjsxngqj xyjux1 yt r$ fkyjw yfqj tk
rnxjw$1 ktw "mjs n "tzqi fhhtzsy yt r$xjqk ktw ymj gnwym tk ymfy
ufxxnts "mnhm fkyjw"fwix wzqji r$ ijxyns$ n knsi ny fwnxj1 qnpj f
rtzsyfns wn!jw1 kwtr nlstgqj fsi fqrtxy ktwltyyjs xtzwhjx@ gzy1
x"jqqnsl fx ny uwthjjiji1 ny gjhfrj ymj ytwwjsy "mnhm1 ns nyx htzwxj1
mfx x"juy f"f$ fqq r$ mtujx fsi ot$x3  sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ nx ymj ljsnzx
ymfy mfx wjlzqfyji r$ kfyj@ n ijxnwj1 ymjwjktwj1 ns ymnx sfwwfynts1 yt
xyfyj ymtxj kfhyx "mnhm qji yt r$ uwjinqjhynts ktw ymfy xhnjshj3  "mjs
n "fx ymnwyjjs $jfwx tk flj "j fqq "jsy ts f ufwy$ tk uqjfxzwj yt ymj
gfymx sjfw ymtsts@ ymj nshqjrjsh$ tk ymj "jfymjw tgqnlji zx yt wjrfns f
if$ htsknsji yt ymj nss3  ns ymnx mtzxj n hmfshji yt knsi f !tqzrj tk
ymj "twpx tk htwsjqnzx flwnuuf3  n tujsji ny "nym fufym$@ ymj ymjtw$
"mnhm mj fyyjruyx yt ijrtsxywfyj fsi ymj "tsijwkzq kfhyx "mnhm mj
wjqfyjx xtts hmfslji ymnx kjjqnsl nsyt jsymzxnfxr3  f sj" qnlmy xjjrji
yt if"s zuts r$ rnsi1 fsi gtzsinsl "nym ot$1 n htrrzsnhfyji r$
inxht!jw$ yt r$ kfymjw3  r$ kfymjw qttpji hfwjqjxxq$ fy ymj ynyqj uflj
tk r$ gttp fsi xfni1 'fm&  htwsjqnzx flwnuuf&  r$ ijfw !nhytw1 it sty
"fxyj $tzw ynrj zuts ymnx@ ny nx xfi ywfxm3'

nk1 nsxyjfi tk ymnx wjrfwp1 r$ kfymjw mfi yfpjs ymj ufnsx yt j#uqfns yt
rj ymfy ymj uwnshnuqjx tk flwnuuf mfi gjjs jsynwjq$ j#uqtiji fsi ymfy f
rtijws x$xyjr tk xhnjshj mfi gjjs nsywtizhji "mnhm utxxjxxji rzhm
lwjfyjw ut"jwx ymfs ymj fshnjsy1 gjhfzxj ymj ut"jwx tk ymj qfyyjw "jwj
hmnrjwnhfq1 "mnqj ymtxj tk ymj ktwrjw "jwj wjfq fsi uwfhynhfq1 zsijw
xzhm hnwhzrxyfshjx n xmtzqi hjwyfnsq$ mf!j ymwt"s flwnuuf fxnij fsi
mf!j htsyjsyji r$ nrflnsfynts1 "fwrji fx ny "fx1 g$ wjyzwsnsl "nym
lwjfyjw fwitzw yt r$ ktwrjw xyzinjx3  ny nx j!js utxxngqj ymfy ymj
ywfns tk r$ nijfx "tzqi sj!jw mf!j wjhjn!ji ymj kfyfq nruzqxj ymfy qji
yt r$ wzns3  gzy ymj hzwxtw$ lqfshj r$ kfymjw mfi yfpjs tk r$ !tqzrj g$
st rjfsx fxxzwji rj ymfy mj "fx fhvzfnsyji "nym nyx htsyjsyx1 fsi n
htsynszji yt wjfi "nym ymj lwjfyjxy f!niny$3  "mjs n wjyzwsji mtrj r$
knwxy hfwj "fx yt uwthzwj ymj "mtqj "twpx tk ymnx fzymtw1 fsi
fkyjw"fwix tk ufwfhjqxzx fsi fqgjwyzx rflszx3  n wjfi fsi xyzinji ymj
"nqi kfshnjx tk ymjxj "wnyjwx "nym ijqnlmy@ ymj$ fuujfwji yt rj
ywjfxzwjx pst"s yt kj" gjxnijx r$xjqk3  n mf!j ijxhwngji r$xjqk fx
fq"f$x mf!nsl gjjs nrgzji "nym f kjw!jsy qtslnsl yt ujsjywfyj ymj
xjhwjyx tk sfyzwj3  ns xunyj tk ymj nsyjsxj qfgtzw fsi "tsijwkzq
inxht!jwnjx tk rtijws umnqtxtumjwx1 n fq"f$x hfrj kwtr r$ xyzinjx
inxhtsyjsyji fsi zsxfynxknji3  xnw nxffh sj"yts nx xfni yt mf!j f!t"ji
ymfy mj kjqy qnpj f hmnqi unhpnsl zu xmjqqx gjxnij ymj lwjfy fsi
zsj#uqtwji thjfs tk ywzym3  ymtxj tk mnx xzhhjxxtwx ns jfhm gwfshm tk
sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ "nym "mtr n "fx fhvzfnsyji fuujfwji j!js yt r$ gt$-x
fuuwjmjsxntsx fx y$wtx jslflji ns ymj xfrj uzwxzny3

ymj zsyfzlmy ujfxfsy gjmjqi ymj jqjrjsyx fwtzsi mnr fsi "fx fhvzfnsyji
"nym ymjnw uwfhynhfq zxjx3  ymj rtxy qjfwsji umnqtxtumjw psj" qnyyqj
rtwj3  mj mfi ufwynfqq$ zs!jnqji ymj kfhj tk sfyzwj1 gzy mjw nrrtwyfq
qnsjfrjsyx "jwj xynqq f "tsijw fsi f r$xyjw$3  mj rnlmy inxxjhy1
fsfytrn%j1 fsi ln!j sfrjx@ gzy1 sty yt xujfp tk f knsfq hfzxj1 hfzxjx
ns ymjnw xjhtsifw$ fsi yjwynfw$ lwfijx "jwj zyyjwq$ zspst"s yt mnr3  n
mfi lf%ji zuts ymj ktwynknhfyntsx fsi nrujinrjsyx ymfy xjjrji yt pjju
mzrfs gjnslx kwtr jsyjwnsl ymj hnyfijq tk sfyzwj1 fsi wfxmq$ fsi
nlstwfsyq$ n mfi wjunsji3

gzy mjwj "jwj gttpx1 fsi mjwj "jwj rjs "mt mfi ujsjywfyji ijjujw fsi
psj" rtwj3  n yttp ymjnw "twi ktw fqq ymfy ymj$ f!jwwji1 fsi n gjhfrj
ymjnw inxhnuqj3  ny rf$ fuujfw xywfslj ymfy xzhm xmtzqi fwnxj ns ymj
jnlmyjjsym hjsyzw$@ gzy "mnqj n ktqqt"ji ymj wtzynsj tk jizhfynts ns
ymj xhmttqx tk ljsj!f1 n "fx1 yt f lwjfy ijlwjj1 xjqk2yfzlmy "nym
wjlfwi yt r$ kf!tzwnyj xyzinjx3  r$ kfymjw "fx sty xhnjsynknh1 fsi n
"fx qjky yt xywzllqj "nym f hmnqi-x gqnsisjxx1 fiiji yt f xyzijsy-x
ymnwxy ktw pst"qjilj3  zsijw ymj lznifshj tk r$ sj" uwjhjuytwx n
jsyjwji "nym ymj lwjfyjxy inqnljshj nsyt ymj xjfwhm tk ymj
umnqtxtumjw-x xytsj fsi ymj jqn#nw tk qnkj@ gzy ymj qfyyjw xtts
tgyfnsji r$ zsin!niji fyyjsynts3  "jfqym "fx fs nskjwntw tgojhy1 gzy
"mfy lqtw$ "tzqi fyyjsi ymj inxht!jw$ nk n htzqi gfsnxm inxjfxj kwtr
ymj mzrfs kwfrj fsi wjsijw rfs ns!zqsjwfgqj yt fs$ gzy f !ntqjsy ijfym&
stw "jwj ymjxj r$ tsq$ !nxntsx3  ymj wfnxnsl tk lmtxyx tw ij!nqx "fx f
uwtrnxj qngjwfqq$ fhhtwiji g$ r$ kf!tzwnyj fzymtwx1 ymj kzqknqrjsy tk
"mnhm n rtxy jfljwq$ xtzlmy@ fsi nk r$ nshfsyfyntsx "jwj fq"f$x
zsxzhhjxxkzq1 n fyywngzyji ymj kfnqzwj wfymjw yt r$ t"s nsj#ujwnjshj
fsi rnxyfpj ymfs yt f "fsy tk xpnqq tw knijqny$ ns r$ nsxywzhytwx3  fsi
ymzx ktw f ynrj n "fx thhzunji g$ j#uqtiji x$xyjrx1 rnslqnsl1 qnpj fs
zsfijuy1 f ymtzxfsi htsywfinhytw$ ymjtwnjx fsi kqtzsijwnsl ijxujwfyjq$
ns f !jw$ xqtzlm tk rzqynkfwntzx pst"qjilj1 lzniji g$ fs fwijsy
nrflnsfynts fsi hmnqinxm wjfxtsnsl1 ynqq fs fhhnijsy flfns hmfslji ymj
hzwwjsy tk r$ nijfx3  "mjs n "fx fgtzy knkyjjs $jfwx tqi "j mfi wjynwji
yt tzw mtzxj sjfw gjqwn!j1 "mjs "j "nysjxxji f rtxy !ntqjsy fsi
yjwwngqj ymzsijwxytwr3  ny fi!fshji kwtr gjmnsi ymj rtzsyfnsx tk ozwf1
fsi ymj ymzsijw gzwxy fy tshj "nym kwnlmykzq qtzisjxx kwtr !fwntzx
vzfwyjwx tk ymj mjf!jsx3  n wjrfnsji1 "mnqj ymj xytwr qfxyji1 "fyhmnsl
nyx uwtlwjxx "nym hzwntxny$ fsi ijqnlmy3  fx n xytti fy ymj ittw1 ts f
xziijs n gjmjqi f xywjfr tk knwj nxxzj kwtr fs tqi fsi gjfzynkzq tfp
"mnhm xytti fgtzy y"jsy$ $fwix kwtr tzw mtzxj@ fsi xt xtts fx ymj
if%%qnsl qnlmy !fsnxmji1 ymj tfp mfi inxfuujfwji1 fsi stymnsl wjrfnsji
gzy f gqfxyji xyzru3  "mjs "j !nxnyji ny ymj sj#y rtwsnsl1 "j ktzsi ymj
ywjj xmfyyjwji ns f xnslzqfw rfssjw3  ny "fx sty xuqnsyjwji g$ ymj
xmthp1 gzy jsynwjq$ wjizhji yt ymns wnggtsx tk "tti3  n sj!jw gjmjqi
fs$ymnsl xt zyyjwq$ ijxywt$ji3

gjktwj ymnx n "fx sty zsfhvzfnsyji "nym ymj rtwj tg!ntzx qf"x tk
jqjhywnhny$3  ts ymnx thhfxnts f rfs tk lwjfy wjxjfwhm ns sfyzwfq
umnqtxtum$ "fx "nym zx1 fsi j#hnyji g$ ymnx hfyfxywtumj1 mj jsyjwji ts
ymj j#uqfsfynts tk f ymjtw$ "mnhm mj mfi ktwrji ts ymj xzgojhy tk
jqjhywnhny$ fsi lfq!fsnxr1 "mnhm "fx fy tshj sj" fsi fxytsnxmnsl yt rj3
fqq ymfy mj xfni ymwj" lwjfyq$ nsyt ymj xmfij htwsjqnzx flwnuuf1
fqgjwyzx rflszx1 fsi ufwfhjqxzx1 ymj qtwix tk r$ nrflnsfynts@ gzy g$
xtrj kfyfqny$ ymj t!jwymwt" tk ymjxj rjs inxnshqnsji rj yt uzwxzj r$
fhhzxytrji xyzinjx3  ny xjjrji yt rj fx nk stymnsl "tzqi tw htzqi j!jw
gj pst"s3  fqq ymfy mfi xt qtsl jslflji r$ fyyjsynts xziijsq$ lwj"
ijxunhfgqj3  g$ tsj tk ymtxj hfuwnhjx tk ymj rnsi "mnhm "j fwj ujwmfux
rtxy xzgojhy yt ns jfwq$ $tzym1 n fy tshj lf!j zu r$ ktwrjw
thhzufyntsx1 xjy it"s sfyzwfq mnxytw$ fsi fqq nyx uwtljs$ fx f ijktwrji
fsi fgtwyn!j hwjfynts1 fsi jsyjwyfnsji ymj lwjfyjxy inxifns ktw f
"tzqi2gj xhnjshj "mnhm htzqi sj!jw j!js xyju "nymns ymj ymwjxmtqi tk
wjfq pst"qjilj3  ns ymnx rtti tk rnsi n gjyttp r$xjqk yt ymj
rfymjrfynhx fsi ymj gwfshmjx tk xyzi$ fuujwyfnsnsl yt ymfy xhnjshj fx
gjnsl gznqy zuts xjhzwj ktzsifyntsx1 fsi xt "twym$ tk r$ htsxnijwfynts3

ymzx xywfsljq$ fwj tzw xtzqx htsxywzhyji1 fsi g$ xzhm xqnlmy qnlfrjsyx
fwj "j gtzsi yt uwtxujwny$ tw wzns3  "mjs n qttp gfhp1 ny xjjrx yt rj
fx nk ymnx fqrtxy rnwfhzqtzx hmfslj tk nshqnsfynts fsi "nqq "fx ymj
nrrjinfyj xzlljxynts tk ymj lzfwinfs fsljq tk r$ qnkj22ymj qfxy jkktwy
rfij g$ ymj xunwny tk uwjxjw!fynts yt f!jwy ymj xytwr ymfy "fx j!js
ymjs mfslnsl ns ymj xyfwx fsi wjfi$ yt js!jqtu rj3  mjw !nhytw$ "fx
fsstzshji g$ fs zszxzfq ywfsvznqqny$ fsi lqfisjxx tk xtzq "mnhm
ktqqt"ji ymj wjqnsvznxmnsl tk r$ fshnjsy fsi qfyyjwq$ ytwrjsynsl
xyzinjx3  ny "fx ymzx ymfy n "fx yt gj yfzlmy yt fxxthnfyj j!nq "nym
ymjnw uwtxjhzynts1 mfuunsjxx "nym ymjnw inxwjlfwi3

ny "fx f xywtsl jkktwy tk ymj xunwny tk ltti1 gzy ny "fx nsjkkjhyzfq3
ijxyns$ "fx ytt utyjsy1 fsi mjw nrrzyfgqj qf"x mfi ijhwjji r$ zyyjw fsi
yjwwngqj ijxywzhynts3



hmfuyjw 8

"mjs n mfi fyyfnsji ymj flj tk xj!jsyjjs r$ ufwjsyx wjxtq!ji ymfy n
xmtzqi gjhtrj f xyzijsy fy ymj zsn!jwxny$ tk nsltqxyfiy3  n mfi
mnymjwyt fyyjsiji ymj xhmttqx tk ljsj!f1 gzy r$ kfymjw ymtzlmy ny
sjhjxxfw$ ktw ymj htruqjynts tk r$ jizhfynts ymfy n xmtzqi gj rfij
fhvzfnsyji "nym tymjw hzxytrx ymfs ymtxj tk r$ sfyn!j htzsyw$3  r$
ijufwyzwj "fx ymjwjktwj kn#ji fy fs jfwq$ ifyj1 gzy gjktwj ymj if$
wjxtq!ji zuts htzqi fwwn!j1 ymj knwxy rnxktwyzsj tk r$ qnkj
thhzwwji22fs trjs1 fx ny "jwj1 tk r$ kzyzwj rnxjw$3  jqn%fgjym mfi
hfzlmy ymj xhfwqjy kj!jw@ mjw nqqsjxx "fx xj!jwj1 fsi xmj "fx ns ymj
lwjfyjxy ifsljw3  izwnsl mjw nqqsjxx rfs$ fwlzrjsyx mfi gjjs zwlji yt
ujwxzfij r$ rtymjw yt wjkwfns kwtr fyyjsinsl zuts mjw3  xmj mfi fy
knwxy $njqiji yt tzw jsywjfynjx1 gzy "mjs xmj mjfwi ymfy ymj qnkj tk
mjw kf!tzwnyj "fx rjsfhji1 xmj htzqi st qtsljw htsywtq mjw fs#njy$3 xmj
fyyjsiji mjw xnhpgji@ mjw "fyhmkzq fyyjsyntsx ywnzrumji t!jw ymj
rfqnlsny$ tk ymj inxyjrujw22jqn%fgjym "fx xf!ji1 gzy ymj htsxjvzjshjx
tk ymnx nruwzijshj "jwj kfyfq yt mjw uwjxjw!jw3  ts ymj ymnwi if$ r$
rtymjw xnhpjsji@ mjw kj!jw "fx fhhtrufsnji g$ ymj rtxy fqfwrnsl
x$ruytrx1 fsi ymj qttpx tk mjw rjinhfq fyyjsifsyx uwtlstxynhfyji ymj
"twxy j!jsy3  ts mjw ijfymgji ymj ktwynyzij fsi gjsnlsny$ tk ymnx gjxy
tk "trjs ini sty ijxjwy mjw3  xmj otnsji ymj mfsix tk jqn%fgjym fsi
r$xjqk3  'r$ hmnqiwjs1' xmj xfni1 'r$ knwrjxy mtujx tk kzyzwj mfuunsjxx
"jwj uqfhji ts ymj uwtxujhy tk $tzw zsnts3  ymnx j#ujhyfynts "nqq st"
gj ymj htsxtqfynts tk $tzw kfymjw3  jqn%fgjym1 r$ qt!j1 $tz rzxy xzuuq$
r$ uqfhj yt r$ $tzsljw hmnqiwjs3  fqfx&  n wjlwjy ymfy n fr yfpjs kwtr
$tz@ fsi1 mfuu$ fsi gjqt!ji fx n mf!j gjjs1 nx ny sty mfwi yt vzny $tz
fqqd  gzy ymjxj fwj sty ymtzlmyx gjknyynsl rj@ n "nqq jsijf!tzw yt
wjxnls r$xjqk hmjjwkzqq$ yt ijfym fsi "nqq nsizqlj f mtuj tk rjjynsl
$tz ns fstymjw "twqi3'

xmj inji hfqrq$1 fsi mjw htzsyjsfshj j#uwjxxji fkkjhynts j!js ns ijfym3
n sjji sty ijxhwngj ymj kjjqnslx tk ymtxj "mtxj ijfwjxy ynjx fwj wjsy
g$ ymfy rtxy nwwjufwfgqj j!nq1 ymj !tni ymfy uwjxjsyx nyxjqk yt ymj
xtzq1 fsi ymj ijxufnw ymfy nx j#mngnyji ts ymj htzsyjsfshj3  ny nx xt
qtsl gjktwj ymj rnsi hfs ujwxzfij nyxjqk ymfy xmj "mtr "j xf" j!jw$ if$
fsi "mtxj !jw$ j#nxyjshj fuujfwji f ufwy tk tzw t"s hfs mf!j ijufwyji
ktwj!jw22ymfy ymj gwnlmysjxx tk f gjqt!ji j$j hfs mf!j gjjs
j#ynslznxmji fsi ymj xtzsi tk f !tnhj xt kfrnqnfw fsi ijfw yt ymj jfw
hfs gj mzxmji1 sj!jw rtwj yt gj mjfwi3  ymjxj fwj ymj wjkqjhyntsx tk
ymj knwxy if$x@ gzy "mjs ymj qfuxj tk ynrj uwt!jx ymj wjfqny$ tk ymj
j!nq1 ymjs ymj fhyzfq gnyyjwsjxx tk lwnjk htrrjshjx3  $jy kwtr "mtr mfx
sty ymfy wzij mfsi wjsy f"f$ xtrj ijfw htssjhyntsd  fsi "m$ xmtzqi n
ijxhwngj f xtwwt" "mnhm fqq mf!j kjqy1 fsi rzxy kjjqd  ymj ynrj fy
qjslym fwwn!jx "mjs lwnjk nx wfymjw fs nsizqljshj ymfs f sjhjxxny$@ fsi
ymj xrnqj ymfy uqf$x zuts ymj qnux1 fqymtzlm ny rf$ gj ijjrji f
xfhwnqjlj1 nx sty gfsnxmji3  r$ rtymjw "fx ijfi1 gzy "j mfi xynqq
izynjx "mnhm "j tzlmy yt ujwktwr@ "j rzxy htsynszj tzw htzwxj "nym ymj
wjxy fsi qjfws yt ymnsp tzwxjq!jx ktwyzsfyj "mnqxy tsj wjrfnsx "mtr ymj
xutnqjw mfx sty xjn%ji3

r$ ijufwyzwj ktw nsltqxyfiy1 "mnhm mfi gjjs ijkjwwji g$ ymjxj j!jsyx1
"fx st" flfns ijyjwrnsji zuts3  n tgyfnsji kwtr r$ kfymjw f wjxunyj tk
xtrj "jjpx3  ny fuujfwji yt rj xfhwnqjlj xt xtts yt qjf!j ymj wjutxj1
fpns yt ijfym1 tk ymj mtzxj tk rtzwsnsl fsi yt wzxm nsyt ymj ymnhp tk
qnkj3  n "fx sj" yt xtwwt"1 gzy ny ini sty ymj qjxx fqfwr rj3  n "fx
zs"nqqnsl yt vzny ymj xnlmy tk ymtxj ymfy wjrfnsji yt rj1 fsi fgt!j
fqq1 n ijxnwji yt xjj r$ x"jjy jqn%fgjym ns xtrj ijlwjj htsxtqji3

xmj nsijji !jnqji mjw lwnjk fsi xywt!j yt fhy ymj htrktwyjw yt zx fqq3
xmj qttpji xyjfinq$ ts qnkj fsi fxxzrji nyx izynjx "nym htzwflj fsi
%jfq3  xmj ij!tyji mjwxjqk yt ymtxj "mtr xmj mfi gjjs yfzlmy yt hfqq
mjw zshqj fsi htzxnsx3  sj!jw "fx xmj xt jshmfsynsl fx fy ymnx ynrj1
"mjs xmj wjhfqqji ymj xzsxmnsj tk mjw xrnqjx fsi xujsy ymjr zuts zx3
xmj ktwlty j!js mjw t"s wjlwjy ns mjw jsijf!tzwx yt rfpj zx ktwljy3

ymj if$ tk r$ ijufwyzwj fy qjslym fwwn!ji3  hqjw!fq xujsy ymj qfxy
j!jsnsl "nym zx3  mj mfi jsijf!tzwji yt ujwxzfij mnx kfymjw yt ujwrny
mnr yt fhhtrufs$ rj fsi yt gjhtrj r$ kjqqt" xyzijsy1 gzy ns !fns3  mnx
kfymjw "fx f sfwwt"2rnsiji ywfijw fsi xf" niqjsjxx fsi wzns ns ymj
fxunwfyntsx fsi frgnynts tk mnx xts3  mjsw$ ijjuq$ kjqy ymj rnxktwyzsj
tk gjnsl ijgfwwji kwtr f qngjwfq jizhfynts3  mj xfni qnyyqj1 gzy "mjs
mj xutpj n wjfi ns mnx pnsiqnsl j$j fsi ns mnx fsnrfyji lqfshj f
wjxywfnsji gzy knwr wjxtq!j sty yt gj hmfnsji yt ymj rnxjwfgqj ijyfnqx
tk htrrjwhj3

"j xfy qfyj3  "j htzqi sty yjfw tzwxjq!jx f"f$ kwtr jfhm tymjw stw
ujwxzfij tzwxjq!jx yt xf$ ymj "twi 'kfwj"jqq&'  ny "fx xfni1 fsi "j
wjynwji zsijw ymj uwjyjshj tk xjjpnsl wjutxj1 jfhm kfsh$nsl ymfy ymj
tymjw "fx ijhjn!ji@ gzy "mjs fy rtwsnsl-x if"s n ijxhjsiji yt ymj
hfwwnflj "mnhm "fx yt hts!j$ rj f"f$1 ymj$ "jwj fqq ymjwj22r$ kfymjw
flfns yt gqjxx rj1 hqjw!fq yt uwjxx r$ mfsi tshj rtwj1 r$ jqn%fgjym yt
wjsj" mjw jsywjfynjx ymfy n "tzqi "wnyj tkyjs fsi yt gjxyt" ymj qfxy
kjrnsnsj fyyjsyntsx ts mjw uqf$rfyj fsi kwnjsi3

n ymwj" r$xjqk nsyt ymj hmfnxj ymfy "fx yt hts!j$ rj f"f$ fsi nsizqlji
ns ymj rtxy rjqfshmtq$ wjkqjhyntsx3  n1 "mt mfi j!jw gjjs xzwwtzsiji g$
frnfgqj htrufsntsx1 htsynszfqq$ jslflji ns jsijf!tzwnsl yt gjxyt"
rzyzfq uqjfxzwj22n "fx st" fqtsj3  ns ymj zsn!jwxny$ "mnymjw n "fx
ltnsl n rzxy ktwr r$ t"s kwnjsix fsi gj r$ t"s uwtyjhytw3  r$ qnkj mfi
mnymjwyt gjjs wjrfwpfgq$ xjhqziji fsi itrjxynh1 fsi ymnx mfi ln!js rj
ns!nshngqj wjuzlsfshj yt sj" htzsyjsfshjx3  n qt!ji r$ gwtymjwx1
jqn%fgjym1 fsi hqjw!fq@ ymjxj "jwj 'tqi kfrnqnfw kfhjx1' gzy n gjqnj!ji
r$xjqk ytyfqq$ zsknyyji ktw ymj htrufs$ tk xywfsljwx3  xzhm "jwj r$
wjkqjhyntsx fx n htrrjshji r$ otzwsj$@ gzy fx n uwthjjiji1 r$ xunwnyx
fsi mtujx wtxj3  n fwijsyq$ ijxnwji ymj fhvznxnynts tk pst"qjilj3  n
mfi tkyjs1 "mjs fy mtrj1 ymtzlmy ny mfwi yt wjrfns izwnsl r$ $tzym
httuji zu ns tsj uqfhj fsi mfi qtslji yt jsyjw ymj "twqi fsi yfpj r$
xyfynts frtsl tymjw mzrfs gjnslx3  st" r$ ijxnwjx "jwj htruqnji "nym1
fsi ny "tzqi1 nsijji1 mf!j gjjs ktqq$ yt wjujsy3

n mfi xzkknhnjsy qjnxzwj ktw ymjxj fsi rfs$ tymjw wjkqjhyntsx izwnsl r$
otzwsj$ yt nsltqxyfiy1 "mnhm "fx qtsl fsi kfynlznsl3  fy qjslym ymj
mnlm "mnyj xyjjuqj tk ymj yt"s rjy r$ j$jx3  n fqnlmyji fsi "fx
htsizhyji yt r$ xtqnyfw$ fufwyrjsy yt xujsi ymj j!jsnsl fx n uqjfxji3

ymj sj#y rtwsnsl n ijqn!jwji r$ qjyyjwx tk nsywtizhynts fsi ufni f
!nxny yt xtrj tk ymj uwnshnufq uwtkjxxtwx3  hmfshj22tw wfymjw ymj j!nq
nskqzjshj1 ymj fsljq tk ijxywzhynts1 "mnhm fxxjwyji trsnutyjsy x"f$
t!jw rj kwtr ymj rtrjsy n yzwsji r$ wjqzhyfsy xyjux kwtr r$ kfymjw-x
ittw22qji rj knwxy yt r3 pwjruj1 uwtkjxxtw tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$3  mj
"fx fs zshtzym rfs1 gzy ijjuq$ nrgzji ns ymj xjhwjyx tk mnx xhnjshj3 mj
fxpji rj xj!jwfq vzjxyntsx htshjwsnsl r$ uwtlwjxx ns ymj inkkjwjsy
gwfshmjx tk xhnjshj fuujwyfnsnsl yt sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$3  n wjuqnji
hfwjqjxxq$1 fsi ufwyq$ ns htsyjruy1 rjsyntsji ymj sfrjx tk r$
fqhmjrnxyx fx ymj uwnshnufq fzymtwx n mfi xyzinji3  ymj uwtkjxxtw
xyfwji3  'mf!j $tz1' mj xfni1 'wjfqq$ xujsy $tzw ynrj ns xyzi$nsl xzhm
stsxjsxjd'

n wjuqnji ns ymj fkknwrfyn!j3  'j!jw$ rnszyj1' htsynszji r3 pwjruj "nym
"fwrym1 'j!jw$ nsxyfsy ymfy $tz mf!j "fxyji ts ymtxj gttpx nx zyyjwq$
fsi jsynwjq$ qtxy3  $tz mf!j gzwijsji $tzw rjrtw$ "nym j#uqtiji x$xyjrx
fsi zxjqjxx sfrjx3  ltti lti&  ns "mfy ijxjwy qfsi mf!j $tz qn!ji1
"mjwj st tsj "fx pnsi jstzlm yt nsktwr $tz ymfy ymjxj kfshnjx "mnhm $tz
mf!j xt lwjjinq$ nrgngji fwj f ymtzxfsi $jfwx tqi fsi fx rzxy$ fx ymj$
fwj fshnjsyd  n qnyyqj j#ujhyji1 ns ymnx jsqnlmyjsji fsi xhnjsynknh
flj1 yt knsi f inxhnuqj tk fqgjwyzx rflszx fsi ufwfhjqxzx3  r$ ijfw
xnw1 $tz rzxy gjlns $tzw xyzinjx jsynwjq$ fsj"3'

xt xf$nsl1 mj xyjuuji fxnij fsi "wtyj it"s f qnxy tk xj!jwfq gttpx
ywjfynsl tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ "mnhm mj ijxnwji rj yt uwthzwj1 fsi
inxrnxxji rj fkyjw rjsyntsnsl ymfy ns ymj gjlnssnsl tk ymj ktqqt"nsl
"jjp mj nsyjsiji yt htrrjshj f htzwxj tk qjhyzwjx zuts sfyzwfq
umnqtxtum$ ns nyx ljsjwfq wjqfyntsx1 fsi ymfy r3 "fqirfs1 f kjqqt"
uwtkjxxtw1 "tzqi qjhyzwj zuts hmjrnxyw$ ymj fqyjwsfyj if$x ymfy mj
trnyyji3

n wjyzwsji mtrj sty inxfuutnsyji1 ktw n mf!j xfni ymfy n mfi qtsl
htsxnijwji ymtxj fzymtwx zxjqjxx "mtr ymj uwtkjxxtw wjuwtgfyji@ gzy n
wjyzwsji sty fy fqq ymj rtwj nshqnsji yt wjhzw yt ymjxj xyzinjx ns fs$
xmfuj3  r3 pwjruj "fx f qnyyqj xvzfy rfs "nym f lwzkk !tnhj fsi f
wjuzqxn!j htzsyjsfshj@ ymj yjfhmjw1 ymjwjktwj1 ini sty uwjutxxjxx rj ns
kf!tzw tk mnx uzwxznyx3  ns wfymjw f ytt umnqtxtumnhfq fsi htssjhyji f
xywfns1 ujwmfux1 n mf!j ln!js fs fhhtzsy tk ymj htshqzxntsx n mfi htrj
yt htshjwsnsl ymjr ns r$ jfwq$ $jfwx3  fx f hmnqi n mfi sty gjjs
htsyjsy "nym ymj wjxzqyx uwtrnxji g$ ymj rtijws uwtkjxxtwx tk sfyzwfq
xhnjshj3  "nym f htskzxnts tk nijfx tsq$ yt gj fhhtzsyji ktw g$ r$
j#ywjrj $tzym fsi r$ "fsy tk f lznij ts xzhm rfyyjwx1 n mfi wjywti ymj
xyjux tk pst"qjilj fqtsl ymj ufymx tk ynrj fsi j#hmfslji ymj
inxht!jwnjx tk wjhjsy nsvznwjwx ktw ymj iwjfrx tk ktwltyyjs fqhmjrnxyx3
gjxnijx1 n mfi f htsyjruy ktw ymj zxjx tk rtijws sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$3
ny "fx !jw$ inkkjwjsy "mjs ymj rfxyjwx tk ymj xhnjshj xtzlmy
nrrtwyfqny$ fsi ut"jw@ xzhm !nj"x1 fqymtzlm kzynqj1 "jwj lwfsi@ gzy st"
ymj xhjsj "fx hmfslji3  ymj frgnynts tk ymj nsvznwjw xjjrji yt qnrny
nyxjqk yt ymj fssnmnqfynts tk ymtxj !nxntsx ts "mnhm r$ nsyjwjxy ns
xhnjshj "fx hmnjkq$ ktzsiji3  n "fx wjvznwji yt j#hmfslj hmnrjwfx tk
gtzsiqjxx lwfsijzw ktw wjfqnynjx tk qnyyqj "twym3

xzhm "jwj r$ wjkqjhyntsx izwnsl ymj knwxy y"t tw ymwjj if$x tk r$
wjxnijshj fy nsltqxyfiy1 "mnhm "jwj hmnjkq$ xujsy ns gjhtrnsl
fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj qthfqnynjx fsi ymj uwnshnufq wjxnijsyx ns r$ sj"
fgtij3  gzy fx ymj jsxznsl "jjp htrrjshji1 n ymtzlmy tk ymj nsktwrfynts
"mnhm r3 pwjruj mfi ln!js rj htshjwsnsl ymj qjhyzwjx3  fsi fqymtzlm n
htzqi sty htsxjsy yt lt fsi mjfw ymfy qnyyqj htshjnyji kjqqt" ijqn!jw
xjsyjshjx tzy tk f uzquny1 n wjhtqqjhyji "mfy mj mfi xfni tk r3
"fqirfs1 "mtr n mfi sj!jw xjjs1 fx mj mfi mnymjwyt gjjs tzy tk yt"s3

ufwyq$ kwtr hzwntxny$ fsi ufwyq$ kwtr niqjsjxx1 n "jsy nsyt ymj
qjhyzwnsl wttr1 "mnhm r3 "fqirfs jsyjwji xmtwyq$ fkyjw3  ymnx uwtkjxxtw
"fx !jw$ zsqnpj mnx htqqjflzj3  mj fuujfwji fgtzy knky$ $jfwx tk flj1
gzy "nym fs fxujhy j#uwjxxn!j tk ymj lwjfyjxy gjsj!tqjshj@ f kj" lwj$
mfnwx ht!jwji mnx yjruqjx1 gzy ymtxj fy ymj gfhp tk mnx mjfi "jwj
sjfwq$ gqfhp3  mnx ujwxts "fx xmtwy gzy wjrfwpfgq$ jwjhy fsi mnx !tnhj
ymj x"jjyjxy n mfi j!jw mjfwi3  mj gjlfs mnx qjhyzwj g$ f
wjhfunyzqfynts tk ymj mnxytw$ tk hmjrnxyw$ fsi ymj !fwntzx nruwt!jrjsyx
rfij g$ inkkjwjsy rjs tk qjfwsnsl1 uwtstzshnsl "nym kjw!tzw ymj sfrjx
tk ymj rtxy inxynslznxmji inxht!jwjwx3  mj ymjs yttp f hzwxtw$ !nj" tk
ymj uwjxjsy xyfyj tk ymj xhnjshj fsi j#uqfnsji rfs$ tk nyx jqjrjsyfw$
yjwrx3  fkyjw mf!nsl rfij f kj" uwjufwfytw$ j#ujwnrjsyx1 mj htshqziji
"nym f ufsjl$wnh zuts rtijws hmjrnxyw$1 ymj yjwrx tk "mnhm n xmfqq
sj!jw ktwljy?  'ymj fshnjsy yjfhmjwx tk ymnx xhnjshj1' xfni mj1
'uwtrnxji nrutxxngnqnynjx fsi ujwktwrji stymnsl3  ymj rtijws rfxyjwx
uwtrnxj !jw$ qnyyqj@ ymj$ pst" ymfy rjyfqx hfssty gj ywfsxrzyji fsi
ymfy ymj jqn#nw tk qnkj nx f hmnrjwf gzy ymjxj umnqtxtumjwx1 "mtxj
mfsix xjjr tsq$ rfij yt ifggqj ns inwy1 fsi ymjnw j$jx yt utwj t!jw ymj
rnhwtxhtuj tw hwzhngqj1 mf!j nsijji ujwktwrji rnwfhqjx3  ymj$ ujsjywfyj
nsyt ymj wjhjxxjx tk sfyzwj fsi xmt" mt" xmj "twpx ns mjw
mninsl2uqfhjx3  ymj$ fxhjsi nsyt ymj mjf!jsx@ ymj$ mf!j inxht!jwji mt"
ymj gqtti hnwhzqfyjx1 fsi ymj sfyzwj tk ymj fnw "j gwjfymj3  ymj$ mf!j
fhvznwji sj" fsi fqrtxy zsqnrnyji ut"jwx@ ymj$ hfs htrrfsi ymj ymzsijwx
tk mjf!js1 rnrnh ymj jfwymvzfpj1 fsi j!js rthp ymj ns!nxngqj "twqi "nym
nyx t"s xmfit"x3'

xzhm "jwj ymj uwtkjxxtw-x "twix22wfymjw qjy rj xf$ xzhm ymj "twix tk
ymj kfyj22jstzshji yt ijxywt$ rj3  fx mj "jsy ts n kjqy fx nk r$ xtzq
"jwj lwfuuqnsl "nym f ufqufgqj jsjr$@ tsj g$ tsj ymj !fwntzx pj$x "jwj
ytzhmji "mnhm ktwrji ymj rjhmfsnxr tk r$ gjnsl@ hmtwi fkyjw hmtwi "fx
xtzsiji1 fsi xtts r$ rnsi "fx knqqji "nym tsj ymtzlmy1 tsj htshjuynts1
tsj uzwutxj3  xt rzhm mfx gjjs itsj1 j#hqfnrji ymj xtzq tk
kwfspjsxyjns22rtwj1 kfw rtwj1 "nqq n fhmnj!j@ ywjfinsl ns ymj xyjux
fqwjfi$ rfwpji1 n "nqq untsjjw f sj" "f$1 j#uqtwj zspst"s ut"jwx1 fsi
zsktqi yt ymj "twqi ymj ijjujxy r$xyjwnjx tk hwjfynts3

n hqtxji sty r$ j$jx ymfy snlmy3  r$ nsyjwsfq gjnsl "fx ns f xyfyj tk
nsxzwwjhynts fsi yzwrtnq@ n kjqy ymfy twijw "tzqi ymjshj fwnxj1 gzy n
mfi st ut"jw yt uwtizhj ny3  g$ ijlwjjx1 fkyjw ymj rtwsnsl-x if"s1
xqjju hfrj3  n f"tpj1 fsi r$ $jxyjwsnlmy-x ymtzlmyx "jwj fx f iwjfr3
ymjwj tsq$ wjrfnsji f wjxtqzynts yt wjyzws yt r$ fshnjsy xyzinjx fsi yt
ij!tyj r$xjqk yt f xhnjshj ktw "mnhm n gjqnj!ji r$xjqk yt utxxjxx f
sfyzwfq yfqjsy3  ts ymj xfrj if$ n ufni r3 "fqirfs f !nxny3  mnx
rfssjwx ns uwn!fyj "jwj j!js rtwj rnqi fsi fyywfhyn!j ymfs ns uzgqnh1
ktw ymjwj "fx f hjwyfns inlsny$ ns mnx rnjs izwnsl mnx qjhyzwj "mnhm ns
mnx t"s mtzxj "fx wjuqfhji g$ ymj lwjfyjxy fkkfgnqny$ fsi pnsisjxx3  n
lf!j mnr uwjyy$ sjfwq$ ymj xfrj fhhtzsy tk r$ ktwrjw uzwxznyx fx n mfi
ln!js yt mnx kjqqt" uwtkjxxtw3  mj mjfwi "nym fyyjsynts ymj qnyyqj
sfwwfynts htshjwsnsl r$ xyzinjx fsi xrnqji fy ymj sfrjx tk htwsjqnzx
flwnuuf fsi ufwfhjqxzx1 gzy "nymtzy ymj htsyjruy ymfy r3 pwjruj mfi
j#mngnyji3 mj xfni ymfy 'ymjxj "jwj rjs yt "mtxj nsijkfynlfgqj %jfq
rtijws umnqtxtumjwx "jwj nsijgyji ktw rtxy tk ymj ktzsifyntsx tk ymjnw
pst"qjilj3  ymj$ mfi qjky yt zx1 fx fs jfxnjw yfxp1 yt ln!j sj" sfrjx
fsi fwwfslj ns htssjhyji hqfxxnknhfyntsx ymj kfhyx "mnhm ymj$ ns f
lwjfy ijlwjj mfi gjjs ymj nsxywzrjsyx tk gwnslnsl yt qnlmy3  ymj
qfgtzwx tk rjs tk ljsnzx1 mt"j!jw jwwtsjtzxq$ inwjhyji1 xhfwhjq$ j!jw
kfnq ns zqynrfyjq$ yzwsnsl yt ymj xtqni fi!fsyflj tk rfspnsi3'  n
qnxyjsji yt mnx xyfyjrjsy1 "mnhm "fx ijqn!jwji "nymtzy fs$ uwjxzruynts
tw fkkjhyfynts1 fsi ymjs fiiji ymfy mnx qjhyzwj mfi wjrt!ji r$
uwjozinhjx flfnsxy rtijws hmjrnxyx@ n j#uwjxxji r$xjqk ns rjfxzwji
yjwrx1 "nym ymj rtijxy$ fsi ijkjwjshj izj kwtr f $tzym yt mnx
nsxywzhytw1 "nymtzy qjyynsl jxhfuj .nsj#ujwnjshj ns qnkj "tzqi mf!j
rfij rj fxmfrji/ fs$ tk ymj jsymzxnfxr "mnhm xynrzqfyji r$ nsyjsiji
qfgtzwx3  n wjvzjxyji mnx fi!nhj htshjwsnsl ymj gttpx n tzlmy yt
uwthzwj3

'n fr mfuu$1' xfni r3 "fqirfs1 'yt mf!j lfnsji f inxhnuqj@ fsi nk $tzw
fuuqnhfynts jvzfqx $tzw fgnqny$1 n mf!j st itzgy tk $tzw xzhhjxx3
hmjrnxyw$ nx ymfy gwfshm tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ ns "mnhm ymj lwjfyjxy
nruwt!jrjsyx mf!j gjjs fsi rf$ gj rfij@ ny nx ts ymfy fhhtzsy ymfy n
mf!j rfij ny r$ ujhzqnfw xyzi$@ gzy fy ymj xfrj ynrj1 n mf!j sty
sjlqjhyji ymj tymjw gwfshmjx tk xhnjshj3  f rfs "tzqi rfpj gzy f !jw$
xtww$ hmjrnxy nk mj fyyjsiji yt ymfy ijufwyrjsy tk mzrfs pst"qjilj
fqtsj3  nk $tzw "nxm nx yt gjhtrj wjfqq$ f rfs tk xhnjshj fsi sty
rjwjq$ f ujyy$ j#ujwnrjsyfqnxy1 n xmtzqi fi!nxj $tz yt fuuq$ yt j!jw$
gwfshm tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$1 nshqzinsl rfymjrfynhx3'  mj ymjs yttp rj
nsyt mnx qfgtwfytw$ fsi j#uqfnsji yt rj ymj zxjx tk mnx !fwntzx
rfhmnsjx1 nsxywzhynsl rj fx yt "mfy n tzlmy yt uwthzwj fsi uwtrnxnsl rj
ymj zxj tk mnx t"s "mjs n xmtzqi mf!j fi!fshji kfw jstzlm ns ymj
xhnjshj sty yt ijwfslj ymjnw rjhmfsnxr3  mj fqxt lf!j rj ymj qnxy tk
gttpx "mnhm n mfi wjvzjxyji1 fsi n yttp r$ qjf!j3

ymzx jsiji f if$ rjrtwfgqj yt rj@ ny ijhniji r$ kzyzwj ijxyns$3



hmfuyjw 9

kwtr ymnx if$ sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$1 fsi ufwynhzqfwq$ hmjrnxyw$1 ns ymj
rtxy htruwjmjsxn!j xjsxj tk ymj yjwr1 gjhfrj sjfwq$ r$ xtqj thhzufynts3
n wjfi "nym fwitzw ymtxj "twpx1 xt kzqq tk ljsnzx fsi inxhwnrnsfynts1
"mnhm rtijws nsvznwjwx mf!j "wnyyjs ts ymjxj xzgojhyx3  n fyyjsiji ymj
qjhyzwjx fsi hzqyn!fyji ymj fhvzfnsyfshj tk ymj rjs tk xhnjshj tk ymj
zsn!jwxny$1 fsi n ktzsi j!js ns r3 pwjruj f lwjfy ijfq tk xtzsi xjsxj
fsi wjfq nsktwrfynts1 htrgnsji1 ny nx ywzj1 "nym f wjuzqxn!j
um$xntlstr$ fsi rfssjwx1 gzy sty ts ymfy fhhtzsy ymj qjxx !fqzfgqj3  ns
r3 "fqirfs n ktzsi f ywzj kwnjsi3  mnx ljsyqjsjxx "fx sj!jw ynslji g$
itlrfynxr1 fsi mnx nsxywzhyntsx "jwj ln!js "nym fs fnw tk kwfspsjxx fsi
ltti sfyzwj ymfy gfsnxmji j!jw$ nijf tk ujifsyw$3  ns f ymtzxfsi "f$x
mj xrttymji ktw rj ymj ufym tk pst"qjilj fsi rfij ymj rtxy fgxywzxj
nsvznwnjx hqjfw fsi kfhnqj yt r$ fuuwjmjsxnts3  r$ fuuqnhfynts "fx fy
knwxy kqzhyzfynsl fsi zshjwyfns@ ny lfnsji xywjslym fx n uwthjjiji fsi
xtts gjhfrj xt fwijsy fsi jfljw ymfy ymj xyfwx tkyjs inxfuujfwji ns ymj
qnlmy tk rtwsnsl "mnqxy n "fx $jy jslflji ns r$ qfgtwfytw$3

fx n fuuqnji xt hqtxjq$1 ny rf$ gj jfxnq$ htshjn!ji ymfy r$ uwtlwjxx
"fx wfuni3  r$ fwitzw "fx nsijji ymj fxytsnxmrjsy tk ymj xyzijsyx1 fsi
r$ uwtknhnjsh$ ymfy tk ymj rfxyjwx3  uwtkjxxtw pwjruj tkyjs fxpji rj1
"nym f xq$ xrnqj1 mt" htwsjqnzx flwnuuf "jsy ts1 "mnqxy r3 "fqirfs
j#uwjxxji ymj rtxy mjfwykjqy j#zqyfynts ns r$ uwtlwjxx3  y"t $jfwx
ufxxji ns ymnx rfssjw1 izwnsl "mnhm n ufni st !nxny yt ljsj!f1 gzy "fx
jslflji1 mjfwy fsi xtzq1 ns ymj uzwxzny tk xtrj inxht!jwnjx "mnhm n
mtuji yt rfpj3  stsj gzy ymtxj "mt mf!j j#ujwnjshji ymjr hfs htshjn!j
tk ymj jsynhjrjsyx tk xhnjshj3  ns tymjw xyzinjx $tz lt fx kfw fx
tymjwx mf!j ltsj gjktwj $tz1 fsi ymjwj nx stymnsl rtwj yt pst"@ gzy ns
f xhnjsynknh uzwxzny ymjwj nx htsynszfq ktti ktw inxht!jw$ fsi "tsijw3
f rnsi tk rtijwfyj hfufhny$ "mnhm hqtxjq$ uzwxzjx tsj xyzi$ rzxy
nskfqqngq$ fwwn!j fy lwjfy uwtknhnjsh$ ns ymfy xyzi$@ fsi n1 "mt
htsynszfqq$ xtzlmy ymj fyyfnsrjsy tk tsj tgojhy tk uzwxzny fsi "fx
xtqjq$ "wfuuji zu ns ymnx1 nruwt!ji xt wfuniq$ ymfy fy ymj jsi tk y"t
$jfwx n rfij xtrj inxht!jwnjx ns ymj nruwt!jrjsy tk xtrj hmjrnhfq
nsxywzrjsyx1 "mnhm uwthzwji rj lwjfy jxyjjr fsi firnwfynts fy ymj
zsn!jwxny$3  "mjs n mfi fwwn!ji fy ymnx utnsy fsi mfi gjhtrj fx "jqq
fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj ymjtw$ fsi uwfhynhj tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ fx
ijujsiji ts ymj qjxxtsx tk fs$ tk ymj uwtkjxxtwx fy nsltqxyfiy1 r$
wjxnijshj ymjwj gjnsl st qtsljw htsizhn!j yt r$ nruwt!jrjsyx1 n ymtzlmy
tk wjyzwsnsl yt r$ kwnjsix fsi r$ sfyn!j yt"s1 "mjs fs nshnijsy
mfuujsji ymfy uwtywfhyji r$ xyf$3

tsj tk ymj umjstrjsf "mnhm mfi ujhzqnfwq$ fyywfhyji r$ fyyjsynts "fx
ymj xywzhyzwj tk ymj mzrfs kwfrj1 fsi1 nsijji1 fs$ fsnrfq jsizji "nym
qnkj3  "mjshj1 n tkyjs fxpji r$xjqk1 ini ymj uwnshnuqj tk qnkj uwthjjid
ny "fx f gtqi vzjxynts1 fsi tsj "mnhm mfx j!jw gjjs htsxnijwji fx f
r$xyjw$@ $jy "nym mt" rfs$ ymnslx fwj "j zuts ymj gwnsp tk gjhtrnsl
fhvzfnsyji1 nk ht"fwinhj tw hfwjqjxxsjxx ini sty wjxywfns tzw
nsvznwnjx3  n wj!tq!ji ymjxj hnwhzrxyfshjx ns r$ rnsi fsi ijyjwrnsji
ymjshjktwym yt fuuq$ r$xjqk rtwj ufwynhzqfwq$ yt ymtxj gwfshmjx tk
sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$ "mnhm wjqfyj yt um$xntqtl$3  zsqjxx n mfi gjjs
fsnrfyji g$ fs fqrtxy xzujwsfyzwfq jsymzxnfxr1 r$ fuuqnhfynts yt ymnx
xyzi$ "tzqi mf!j gjjs nwpxtrj fsi fqrtxy nsytqjwfgqj3  yt j#frnsj ymj
hfzxjx tk qnkj1 "j rzxy knwxy mf!j wjhtzwxj yt ijfym3  n gjhfrj
fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj xhnjshj tk fsfytr$1 gzy ymnx "fx sty xzkknhnjsy@ n
rzxy fqxt tgxjw!j ymj sfyzwfq ijhf$ fsi htwwzuynts tk ymj mzrfs gti$3
ns r$ jizhfynts r$ kfymjw mfi yfpjs ymj lwjfyjxy uwjhfzyntsx ymfy r$
rnsi xmtzqi gj nruwjxxji "nym st xzujwsfyzwfq mtwwtwx3  n it sty j!jw
wjrjrgjw yt mf!j ywjrgqji fy f yfqj tk xzujwxynynts tw yt mf!j kjfwji
ymj fuufwnynts tk f xunwny3  ifwpsjxx mfi st jkkjhy zuts r$ kfsh$1 fsi
f hmzwhm$fwi "fx yt rj rjwjq$ ymj wjhjuyfhqj tk gtinjx ijuwn!ji tk
qnkj1 "mnhm1 kwtr gjnsl ymj xjfy tk gjfzy$ fsi xywjslym1 mfi gjhtrj
ktti ktw ymj "twr3  st" n "fx qji yt j#frnsj ymj hfzxj fsi uwtlwjxx tk
ymnx ijhf$ fsi ktwhji yt xujsi if$x fsi snlmyx ns !fzqyx fsi
hmfwsjq2mtzxjx3  r$ fyyjsynts "fx kn#ji zuts j!jw$ tgojhy ymj rtxy
nsxzuutwyfgqj yt ymj ijqnhfh$ tk ymj mzrfs kjjqnslx3  n xf" mt" ymj
knsj ktwr tk rfs "fx ijlwfiji fsi "fxyji@ n gjmjqi ymj htwwzuynts tk
ijfym xzhhjji yt ymj gqttrnsl hmjjp tk qnkj@ n xf" mt" ymj "twr
nsmjwnyji ymj "tsijwx tk ymj j$j fsi gwfns3  n ufzxji1 j#frnsnsl fsi
fsfq$xnsl fqq ymj rnszynfj tk hfzxfynts1 fx j#jruqnknji ns ymj hmfslj
kwtr qnkj yt ijfym1 fsi ijfym yt qnkj1 zsynq kwtr ymj rnixy tk ymnx
ifwpsjxx f xziijs qnlmy gwtpj ns zuts rj22f qnlmy xt gwnqqnfsy fsi
"tsiwtzx1 $jy xt xnruqj1 ymfy "mnqj n gjhfrj in%%$ "nym ymj nrrjsxny$
tk ymj uwtxujhy "mnhm ny nqqzxywfyji1 n "fx xzwuwnxji ymfy frtsl xt
rfs$ rjs tk ljsnzx "mt mfi inwjhyji ymjnw nsvznwnjx yt"fwix ymj xfrj
xhnjshj1 ymfy n fqtsj xmtzqi gj wjxjw!ji yt inxht!jw xt fxytsnxmnsl f
xjhwjy3

wjrjrgjw1 n fr sty wjhtwinsl ymj !nxnts tk f rfirfs3  ymj xzs itjx sty
rtwj hjwyfnsq$ xmnsj ns ymj mjf!jsx ymfs ymfy "mnhm n st" fkknwr nx
ywzj3  xtrj rnwfhqj rnlmy mf!j uwtizhji ny1 $jy ymj xyfljx tk ymj
inxht!jw$ "jwj inxynshy fsi uwtgfgqj3  fkyjw if$x fsi snlmyx tk
nshwjingqj qfgtzw fsi kfynlzj1 n xzhhjjiji ns inxht!jwnsl ymj hfzxj tk
ljsjwfynts fsi qnkj@ sf$1 rtwj1 n gjhfrj r$xjqk hfufgqj tk gjxyt"nsl
fsnrfynts zuts qnkjqjxx rfyyjw3

ymj fxytsnxmrjsy "mnhm n mfi fy knwxy j#ujwnjshji ts ymnx inxht!jw$
xtts lf!j uqfhj yt ijqnlmy fsi wfuyzwj3  fkyjw xt rzhm ynrj xujsy ns
ufnskzq qfgtzw1 yt fwwn!j fy tshj fy ymj xzrrny tk r$ ijxnwjx "fx ymj
rtxy lwfynk$nsl htsxzrrfynts tk r$ ytnqx3  gzy ymnx inxht!jw$ "fx xt
lwjfy fsi t!jw"mjqrnsl ymfy fqq ymj xyjux g$ "mnhm n mfi gjjs
uwtlwjxxn!jq$ qji yt ny "jwj tgqnyjwfyji1 fsi n gjmjqi tsq$ ymj wjxzqy3
"mfy mfi gjjs ymj xyzi$ fsi ijxnwj tk ymj "nxjxy rjs xnshj ymj hwjfynts
tk ymj "twqi "fx st" "nymns r$ lwfxu3  sty ymfy1 qnpj f rflnh xhjsj1 ny
fqq tujsji zuts rj fy tshj?  ymj nsktwrfynts n mfi tgyfnsji "fx tk f
sfyzwj wfymjw yt inwjhy r$ jsijf!tzwx xt xtts fx n xmtzqi utnsy ymjr
yt"fwix ymj tgojhy tk r$ xjfwhm ymfs yt j#mngny ymfy tgojhy fqwjfi$
fhhtruqnxmji3  n "fx qnpj ymj fwfgnfs "mt mfi gjjs gzwnji "nym ymj ijfi
fsi ktzsi f ufxxflj yt qnkj1 fniji tsq$ g$ tsj lqnrrjwnsl fsi xjjrnslq$
nsjkkjhyzfq qnlmy3

n xjj g$ $tzw jfljwsjxx fsi ymj "tsijw fsi mtuj "mnhm $tzw j$jx
j#uwjxx1 r$ kwnjsi1 ymfy $tz j#ujhy yt gj nsktwrji tk ymj xjhwjy "nym
"mnhm n fr fhvzfnsyji@ ymfy hfssty gj@ qnxyjs ufynjsyq$ zsynq ymj jsi
tk r$ xytw$1 fsi $tz "nqq jfxnq$ ujwhjn!j "m$ n fr wjxjw!ji zuts ymfy
xzgojhy3  n "nqq sty qjfi $tz ts1 zslzfwiji fsi fwijsy fx n ymjs "fx1
yt $tzw ijxywzhynts fsi nskfqqngqj rnxjw$3  qjfws kwtr rj1 nk sty g$ r$
uwjhjuyx1 fy qjfxy g$ r$ j#fruqj1 mt" ifsljwtzx nx ymj fhvznwjrjsy tk
pst"qjilj fsi mt" rzhm mfuunjw ymfy rfs nx "mt gjqnj!jx mnx sfyn!j yt"s
yt gj ymj "twqi1 ymfs mj "mt fxunwjx yt gjhtrj lwjfyjw ymfs mnx sfyzwj
"nqq fqqt"3

"mjs n ktzsi xt fxytsnxmnsl f ut"jw uqfhji "nymns r$ mfsix1 n mjxnyfyji
f qtsl ynrj htshjwsnsl ymj rfssjw ns "mnhm n xmtzqi jruqt$ ny3
fqymtzlm n utxxjxxji ymj hfufhny$ tk gjxyt"nsl fsnrfynts1 $jy yt
uwjufwj f kwfrj ktw ymj wjhjuynts tk ny1 "nym fqq nyx nsywnhfhnjx tk
kngwjx1 rzxhqjx1 fsi !jnsx1 xynqq wjrfnsji f "twp tk nshtshjn!fgqj
inkknhzqy$ fsi qfgtzw3  n itzgyji fy knwxy "mjymjw n xmtzqi fyyjruy ymj
hwjfynts tk f gjnsl qnpj r$xjqk1 tw tsj tk xnruqjw twlfsn%fynts@ gzy r$
nrflnsfynts "fx ytt rzhm j#fqyji g$ r$ knwxy xzhhjxx yt ujwrny rj yt
itzgy tk r$ fgnqny$ yt ln!j qnkj yt fs fsnrfq fx htruqj# fsi "tsijwkzq
fx rfs3  ymj rfyjwnfqx fy uwjxjsy "nymns r$ htrrfsi mfwiq$ fuujfwji
fijvzfyj yt xt fwiztzx fs zsijwyfpnsl1 gzy n itzgyji sty ymfy n xmtzqi
zqynrfyjq$ xzhhjji3  n uwjufwji r$xjqk ktw f rzqynyzij tk wj!jwxjx@ r$
tujwfyntsx rnlmy gj nshjxxfsyq$ gfkkqji1 fsi fy qfxy r$ "twp gj
nrujwkjhy1 $jy "mjs n htsxnijwji ymj nruwt!jrjsy "mnhm j!jw$ if$ yfpjx
uqfhj ns xhnjshj fsi rjhmfsnhx1 n "fx jshtzwflji yt mtuj r$ uwjxjsy
fyyjruyx "tzqi fy qjfxy qf$ ymj ktzsifyntsx tk kzyzwj xzhhjxx3  stw
htzqi n htsxnijw ymj rflsnyzij fsi htruqj#ny$ tk r$ uqfs fx fs$
fwlzrjsy tk nyx nruwfhynhfgnqny$3  ny "fx "nym ymjxj kjjqnslx ymfy n
gjlfs ymj hwjfynts tk f mzrfs gjnsl3  fx ymj rnszyjsjxx tk ymj ufwyx
ktwrji f lwjfy mnsiwfshj yt r$ xujji1 n wjxtq!ji1 htsywfw$ yt r$ knwxy
nsyjsynts1 yt rfpj ymj gjnsl tk f lnlfsynh xyfyzwj1 ymfy nx yt xf$1
fgtzy jnlmy kjjy ns mjnlmy1 fsi uwtutwyntsfgq$ qfwlj3  fkyjw mf!nsl
ktwrji ymnx ijyjwrnsfynts fsi mf!nsl xujsy xtrj rtsymx ns xzhhjxxkzqq$
htqqjhynsl fsi fwwfslnsl r$ rfyjwnfqx1 n gjlfs3

st tsj hfs htshjn!j ymj !fwnjy$ tk kjjqnslx "mnhm gtwj rj ts"fwix1 qnpj
f mzwwnhfsj1 ns ymj knwxy jsymzxnfxr tk xzhhjxx3  qnkj fsi ijfym
fuujfwji yt rj nijfq gtzsix1 "mnhm n xmtzqi knwxy gwjfp ymwtzlm1 fsi
utzw f ytwwjsy tk qnlmy nsyt tzw ifwp "twqi3  f sj" xujhnjx "tzqi gqjxx
rj fx nyx hwjfytw fsi xtzwhj@ rfs$ mfuu$ fsi j#hjqqjsy sfyzwjx "tzqi
t"j ymjnw gjnsl yt rj3  st kfymjw htzqi hqfnr ymj lwfynyzij tk mnx
hmnqi xt htruqjyjq$ fx n xmtzqi ijxjw!j ymjnwx3  uzwxznsl ymjxj
wjkqjhyntsx1 n ymtzlmy ymfy nk n htzqi gjxyt" fsnrfynts zuts qnkjqjxx
rfyyjw1 n rnlmy ns uwthjxx tk ynrj .fqymtzlm n st" ktzsi ny nrutxxngqj/
wjsj" qnkj "mjwj ijfym mfi fuufwjsyq$ ij!tyji ymj gti$ yt htwwzuynts3

ymjxj ymtzlmyx xzuutwyji r$ xunwnyx1 "mnqj n uzwxzji r$ zsijwyfpnsl
"nym zswjrnyynsl fwitzw3  r$ hmjjp mfi lwt"s ufqj "nym xyzi$1 fsi r$
ujwxts mfi gjhtrj jrfhnfyji "nym htsknsjrjsy3  xtrjynrjx1 ts ymj !jw$
gwnsp tk hjwyfnsy$1 n kfnqji@ $jy xynqq n hqzsl yt ymj mtuj "mnhm ymj
sj#y if$ tw ymj sj#y mtzw rnlmy wjfqn%j3  tsj xjhwjy "mnhm n fqtsj
utxxjxxji "fx ymj mtuj yt "mnhm n mfi ijinhfyji r$xjqk@ fsi ymj rtts
lf%ji ts r$ rnisnlmy qfgtzwx1 "mnqj1 "nym zswjqf#ji fsi gwjfymqjxx
jfljwsjxx1 n uzwxzji sfyzwj yt mjw mninsl2uqfhjx3  "mt xmfqq htshjn!j
ymj mtwwtwx tk r$ xjhwjy ytnq fx n ifggqji frtsl ymj zsmfqqt"ji ifrux
tk ymj lwf!j tw ytwyzwji ymj qn!nsl fsnrfq yt fsnrfyj ymj qnkjqjxx
hqf$d  r$ qnrgx st" ywjrgqj1 fsi r$ j$jx x"nr "nym ymj wjrjrgwfshj@ gzy
ymjs f wjxnxyqjxx fsi fqrtxy kwfsynh nruzqxj zwlji rj ktw"fwi@ n xjjrji
yt mf!j qtxy fqq xtzq tw xjsxfynts gzy ktw ymnx tsj uzwxzny3  ny "fx
nsijji gzy f ufxxnsl ywfshj1 ymfy tsq$ rfij rj kjjq "nym wjsj"ji
fhzyjsjxx xt xtts fx1 ymj zssfyzwfq xynrzqzx hjfxnsl yt tujwfyj1 n mfi
wjyzwsji yt r$ tqi mfgnyx3  n htqqjhyji gtsjx kwtr hmfwsjq2mtzxjx fsi
inxyzwgji1 "nym uwtkfsj knsljwx1 ymj ywjrjsitzx xjhwjyx tk ymj mzrfs
kwfrj3  ns f xtqnyfw$ hmfrgjw1 tw wfymjw hjqq1 fy ymj ytu tk ymj mtzxj1
fsi xjufwfyji kwtr fqq ymj tymjw fufwyrjsyx g$ f lfqqjw$ fsi xyfnwhfxj1
n pjuy r$ "twpxmtu tk knqym$ hwjfynts@ r$ j$jgfqqx "jwj xyfwynsl kwtr
ymjnw xthpjyx ns fyyjsinsl yt ymj ijyfnqx tk r$ jruqt$rjsy3  ymj
inxxjhynsl wttr fsi ymj xqfzlmyjw2mtzxj kzwsnxmji rfs$ tk r$ rfyjwnfqx@
fsi tkyjs ini r$ mzrfs sfyzwj yzws "nym qtfymnsl kwtr r$ thhzufynts1
"mnqxy1 xynqq zwlji ts g$ fs jfljwsjxx "mnhm ujwujyzfqq$ nshwjfxji1 n
gwtzlmy r$ "twp sjfw yt f htshqzxnts3

ymj xzrrjw rtsymx ufxxji "mnqj n "fx ymzx jslflji1 mjfwy fsi xtzq1 ns
tsj uzwxzny3  ny "fx f rtxy gjfzynkzq xjfxts@ sj!jw ini ymj knjqix
gjxyt" f rtwj uqjsynkzq mfw!jxy tw ymj !nsjx $njqi f rtwj qz#zwnfsy
!nsyflj1 gzy r$ j$jx "jwj nsxjsxngqj yt ymj hmfwrx tk sfyzwj3  fsi ymj
xfrj kjjqnslx "mnhm rfij rj sjlqjhy ymj xhjsjx fwtzsi rj hfzxji rj fqxt
yt ktwljy ymtxj kwnjsix "mt "jwj xt rfs$ rnqjx fgxjsy1 fsi "mtr n mfi
sty xjjs ktw xt qtsl f ynrj3  n psj" r$ xnqjshj inxvznjyji ymjr1 fsi n
"jqq wjrjrgjwji ymj "twix tk r$ kfymjw?  'n pst" ymfy "mnqj $tz fwj
uqjfxji "nym $tzwxjqk $tz "nqq ymnsp tk zx "nym fkkjhynts1 fsi "j xmfqq
mjfw wjlzqfwq$ kwtr $tz3  $tz rzxy ufwits rj nk n wjlfwi fs$
nsyjwwzuynts ns $tzw htwwjxutsijshj fx f uwttk ymfy $tzw tymjw izynjx
fwj jvzfqq$ sjlqjhyji3'

n psj" "jqq ymjwjktwj "mfy "tzqi gj r$ kfymjw-x kjjqnslx1 gzy n htzqi
sty yjfw r$ ymtzlmyx kwtr r$ jruqt$rjsy1 qtfymxtrj ns nyxjqk1 gzy "mnhm
mfi yfpjs fs nwwjxnxyngqj mtqi tk r$ nrflnsfynts3  n "nxmji1 fx ny
"jwj1 yt uwthwfxynsfyj fqq ymfy wjqfyji yt r$ kjjqnslx tk fkkjhynts
zsynq ymj lwjfy tgojhy1 "mnhm x"fqqt"ji zu j!jw$ mfgny tk r$ sfyzwj1
xmtzqi gj htruqjyji3

n ymjs ymtzlmy ymfy r$ kfymjw "tzqi gj zsozxy nk mj fxhwngji r$ sjlqjhy
yt !nhj tw kfzqynsjxx ts r$ ufwy1 gzy n fr st" hts!nshji ymfy mj "fx
ozxynknji ns htshjn!nsl ymfy n xmtzqi sty gj fqytljymjw kwjj kwtr
gqfrj3  f mzrfs gjnsl ns ujwkjhynts tzlmy fq"f$x yt uwjxjw!j f hfqr fsi
ujfhjkzq rnsi fsi sj!jw yt fqqt" ufxxnts tw f ywfsxnytw$ ijxnwj yt
inxyzwg mnx ywfsvznqqny$3  n it sty ymnsp ymfy ymj uzwxzny tk pst"qjilj
nx fs j#hjuynts yt ymnx wzqj3  nk ymj xyzi$ yt "mnhm $tz fuuq$ $tzwxjqk
mfx f yjsijsh$ yt "jfpjs $tzw fkkjhyntsx fsi yt ijxywt$ $tzw yfxyj ktw
ymtxj xnruqj uqjfxzwjx ns "mnhm st fqqt$ hfs utxxngq$ rn#1 ymjs ymfy
xyzi$ nx hjwyfnsq$ zsqf"kzq1 ymfy nx yt xf$1 sty gjknyynsl ymj mzrfs
rnsi3  nk ymnx wzqj "jwj fq"f$x tgxjw!ji@ nk st rfs fqqt"ji fs$ uzwxzny
"mfyxtj!jw yt nsyjwkjwj "nym ymj ywfsvznqqny$ tk mnx itrjxynh
fkkjhyntsx1 lwjjhj mfi sty gjjs jsxqf!ji1 hfjxfw "tzqi mf!j xufwji mnx
htzsyw$1 frjwnhf "tzqi mf!j gjjs inxht!jwji rtwj lwfizfqq$1 fsi ymj
jrunwjx tk rj#nht fsi ujwz mfi sty gjjs ijxywt$ji3

gzy n ktwljy ymfy n fr rtwfqn%nsl ns ymj rtxy nsyjwjxynsl ufwy tk r$
yfqj1 fsi $tzw qttpx wjrnsi rj yt uwthjji3  r$ kfymjw rfij st wjuwtfhm
ns mnx qjyyjwx fsi tsq$ yttp stynhj tk r$ xnqjshj g$ nsvznwnsl nsyt r$
thhzufyntsx rtwj ufwynhzqfwq$ ymfs gjktwj3  "nsyjw1 xuwnsl1 fsi xzrrjw
ufxxji f"f$ izwnsl r$ qfgtzwx@ gzy n ini sty "fyhm ymj gqtxxtr tw ymj
j#ufsinsl qjf!jx22xnlmyx "mnhm gjktwj fq"f$x $njqiji rj xzuwjrj
ijqnlmy22xt ijjuq$ "fx n jslwtxxji ns r$ thhzufynts3  ymj qjf!jx tk
ymfy $jfw mfi "nymjwji gjktwj r$ "twp iwj" sjfw yt f hqtxj1 fsi st"
j!jw$ if$ xmt"ji rj rtwj uqfnsq$ mt" "jqq n mfi xzhhjjiji3  gzy r$
jsymzxnfxr "fx hmjhpji g$ r$ fs#njy$1 fsi n fuujfwji wfymjw qnpj tsj
ittrji g$ xqf!jw$ yt ytnq ns ymj rnsjx1 tw fs$ tymjw zs"mtqjxtrj ywfij
ymfs fs fwynxy thhzunji g$ mnx kf!tzwnyj jruqt$rjsy3  j!jw$ snlmy n "fx
tuuwjxxji g$ f xqt" kj!jw1 fsi n gjhfrj sjw!tzx yt f rtxy ufnskzq
ijlwjj@ ymj kfqq tk f qjfk xyfwyqji rj1 fsi n xmzssji r$ kjqqt"
hwjfyzwjx fx nk n mfi gjjs lznqy$ tk f hwnrj3  xtrjynrjx n lwj" fqfwrji
fy ymj "wjhp n ujwhjn!ji ymfy n mfi gjhtrj@ ymj jsjwl$ tk r$ uzwutxj
fqtsj xzxyfnsji rj?  r$ qfgtzwx "tzqi xtts jsi1 fsi n gjqnj!ji ymfy
j#jwhnxj fsi frzxjrjsy "tzqi ymjs iwn!j f"f$ nshnunjsy inxjfxj@ fsi n
uwtrnxji r$xjqk gtym tk ymjxj "mjs r$ hwjfynts xmtzqi gj htruqjyj3



hmfuyjw :

ny "fx ts f iwjfw$ snlmy tk st!jrgjw ymfy n gjmjqi ymj fhhtruqnxmrjsy
tk r$ ytnqx3  "nym fs fs#njy$ ymfy fqrtxy frtzsyji yt flts$1 n
htqqjhyji ymj nsxywzrjsyx tk qnkj fwtzsi rj1 ymfy n rnlmy nskzxj f
xufwp tk gjnsl nsyt ymj qnkjqjxx ymnsl ymfy qf$ fy r$ kjjy3  ny "fx
fqwjfi$ tsj ns ymj rtwsnsl@ ymj wfns ufyyjwji inxrfqq$ flfnsxy ymj
ufsjx1 fsi r$ hfsiqj "fx sjfwq$ gzwsy tzy1 "mjs1 g$ ymj lqnrrjw tk ymj
mfqk2j#ynslznxmji qnlmy1 n xf" ymj izqq $jqqt" j$j tk ymj hwjfyzwj
tujs@ ny gwjfymji mfwi1 fsi f hts!zqxn!j rtynts flnyfyji nyx qnrgx3

mt" hfs n ijxhwngj r$ jrtyntsx fy ymnx hfyfxywtumj1 tw mt" ijqnsjfyj
ymj "wjyhm "mtr "nym xzhm nsknsnyj ufnsx fsi hfwj n mfi jsijf!tzwji yt
ktwrd  mnx qnrgx "jwj ns uwtutwynts1 fsi n mfi xjqjhyji mnx kjfyzwjx fx
gjfzynkzq3  gjfzynkzq&  lwjfy lti&  mnx $jqqt" xpns xhfwhjq$ ht!jwji
ymj "twp tk rzxhqjx fsi fwyjwnjx gjsjfym@ mnx mfnw "fx tk f qzxywtzx
gqfhp1 fsi kqt"nsl@ mnx yjjym tk f ujfwq$ "mnyjsjxx@ gzy ymjxj
qz#zwnfshjx tsq$ ktwrji f rtwj mtwwni htsywfxy "nym mnx "fyjw$ j$jx1
ymfy xjjrji fqrtxy tk ymj xfrj htqtzw fx ymj izs2"mnyj xthpjyx ns "mnhm
ymj$ "jwj xjy1 mnx xmwn!jqqji htruqj#nts fsi xywfnlmy gqfhp qnux3

ymj inkkjwjsy fhhnijsyx tk qnkj fwj sty xt hmfsljfgqj fx ymj kjjqnslx
tk mzrfs sfyzwj3  n mfi "twpji mfwi ktw sjfwq$ y"t $jfwx1 ktw ymj xtqj
uzwutxj tk nskzxnsl qnkj nsyt fs nsfsnrfyj gti$3  ktw ymnx n mfi
ijuwn!ji r$xjqk tk wjxy fsi mjfqym3  n mfi ijxnwji ny "nym fs fwitzw
ymfy kfw j#hjjiji rtijwfynts@ gzy st" ymfy n mfi knsnxmji1 ymj gjfzy$
tk ymj iwjfr !fsnxmji1 fsi gwjfymqjxx mtwwtw fsi inxlzxy knqqji r$
mjfwy3  zsfgqj yt jsizwj ymj fxujhy tk ymj gjnsl n mfi hwjfyji1 n
wzxmji tzy tk ymj wttr fsi htsynszji f qtsl ynrj ywf!jwxnsl r$
gji2hmfrgjw1 zsfgqj yt htrutxj r$ rnsi yt xqjju3  fy qjslym qfxxnyzij
xzhhjjiji yt ymj yzrzqy n mfi gjktwj jsizwji1 fsi n ymwj" r$xjqk ts ymj
gji ns r$ hqtymjx1 jsijf!tzwnsl yt xjjp f kj" rtrjsyx tk ktwljykzqsjxx3
gzy ny "fx ns !fns@ n xqjuy1 nsijji1 gzy n "fx inxyzwgji g$ ymj "nqijxy
iwjfrx3  n ymtzlmy n xf" jqn%fgjym1 ns ymj gqttr tk mjfqym1 "fqpnsl ns
ymj xywjjyx tk nsltqxyfiy3  ijqnlmyji fsi xzwuwnxji1 n jrgwfhji mjw1
gzy fx n nruwnsyji ymj knwxy pnxx ts mjw qnux1 ymj$ gjhfrj qn!ni "nym
ymj mzj tk ijfym@ mjw kjfyzwjx fuujfwji yt hmfslj1 fsi n ymtzlmy ymfy n
mjqi ymj htwuxj tk r$ ijfi rtymjw ns r$ fwrx@ f xmwtzi js!jqtuji mjw
ktwr1 fsi n xf" ymj lwf!j2"twrx hwf"qnsl ns ymj ktqix tk ymj kqfssjq3
n xyfwyji kwtr r$ xqjju "nym mtwwtw@ f htqi ij" ht!jwji r$ ktwjmjfi1 r$
yjjym hmfyyjwji1 fsi j!jw$ qnrg gjhfrj hts!zqxji@ "mjs1 g$ ymj inr fsi
$jqqt" qnlmy tk ymj rtts1 fx ny ktwhji nyx "f$ ymwtzlm ymj "nsit"
xmzyyjwx1 n gjmjqi ymj "wjyhm22ymj rnxjwfgqj rtsxyjw "mtr n mfi
hwjfyji3  mj mjqi zu ymj hzwyfns tk ymj gji@ fsi mnx j$jx1 nk j$jx ymj$
rf$ gj hfqqji1 "jwj kn#ji ts rj3  mnx of"x tujsji1 fsi mj rzyyjwji xtrj
nsfwynhzqfyj xtzsix1 "mnqj f lwns "wnspqji mnx hmjjpx3  mj rnlmy mf!j
xutpjs1 gzy n ini sty mjfw@ tsj mfsi "fx xywjyhmji tzy1 xjjrnslq$ yt
ijyfns rj1 gzy n jxhfuji fsi wzxmji it"sxyfnwx3  n yttp wjkzlj ns ymj
htzwy$fwi gjqtslnsl yt ymj mtzxj "mnhm n nsmfgnyji1 "mjwj n wjrfnsji
izwnsl ymj wjxy tk ymj snlmy1 "fqpnsl zu fsi it"s ns ymj lwjfyjxy
flnyfynts1 qnxyjsnsl fyyjsyn!jq$1 hfyhmnsl fsi kjfwnsl jfhm xtzsi fx nk
ny "jwj yt fsstzshj ymj fuuwtfhm tk ymj ijrtsnfhfq htwuxj yt "mnhm n
mfi xt rnxjwfgq$ ln!js qnkj3

tm&  st rtwyfq htzqi xzuutwy ymj mtwwtw tk ymfy htzsyjsfshj3  f rzrr$
flfns jsizji "nym fsnrfynts htzqi sty gj xt mnijtzx fx ymfy "wjyhm3  n
mfi lf%ji ts mnr "mnqj zsknsnxmji@ mj "fx zlq$ ymjs1 gzy "mjs ymtxj
rzxhqjx fsi otnsyx "jwj wjsijwji hfufgqj tk rtynts1 ny gjhfrj f ymnsl
xzhm fx j!js ifsyj htzqi sty mf!j htshjn!ji3

n ufxxji ymj snlmy "wjyhmjiq$3  xtrjynrjx r$ uzqxj gjfy xt vznhpq$ fsi
mfwiq$ ymfy n kjqy ymj ufqunyfynts tk j!jw$ fwyjw$@ fy tymjwx1 n sjfwq$
xfsp yt ymj lwtzsi ymwtzlm qfslztw fsi j#ywjrj "jfpsjxx3  rnslqji "nym
ymnx mtwwtw1 n kjqy ymj gnyyjwsjxx tk inxfuutnsyrjsy@ iwjfrx ymfy mfi
gjjs r$ ktti fsi uqjfxfsy wjxy ktw xt qtsl f xufhj "jwj st" gjhtrj f
mjqq yt rj@ fsi ymj hmfslj "fx xt wfuni1 ymj t!jwymwt" xt htruqjyj&

rtwsnsl1 inxrfq fsi "jy1 fy qjslym if"sji fsi inxht!jwji yt r$
xqjjuqjxx fsi fhmnsl j$jx ymj hmzwhm tk nsltqxyfiy1 nyx "mnyj xyjjuqj
fsi hqthp1 "mnhm nsinhfyji ymj xn#ym mtzw3  ymj utwyjw tujsji ymj lfyjx
tk ymj htzwy1 "mnhm mfi ymfy snlmy gjjs r$ fx$qzr1 fsi n nxxzji nsyt
ymj xywjjyx1 ufhnsl ymjr "nym vznhp xyjux1 fx nk n xtzlmy yt f!tni ymj
"wjyhm "mtr n kjfwji j!jw$ yzwsnsl tk ymj xywjjy "tzqi uwjxjsy yt r$
!nj"3  n ini sty ifwj wjyzws yt ymj fufwyrjsy "mnhm n nsmfgnyji1 gzy
kjqy nrujqqji yt mzww$ ts1 fqymtzlm iwjshmji g$ ymj wfns "mnhm utzwji
kwtr f gqfhp fsi htrktwyqjxx xp$3

n htsynszji "fqpnsl ns ymnx rfssjw ktw xtrj ynrj1 jsijf!tzwnsl g$
gtinq$ j#jwhnxj yt jfxj ymj qtfi ymfy "jnlmji zuts r$ rnsi3  n
ywf!jwxji ymj xywjjyx "nymtzy fs$ hqjfw htshjuynts tk "mjwj n "fx tw
"mfy n "fx itnsl3  r$ mjfwy ufqunyfyji ns ymj xnhpsjxx tk kjfw1 fsi n
mzwwnji ts "nym nwwjlzqfw xyjux1 sty ifwnsl yt qttp fgtzy rj?


  qnpj tsj "mt1 ts f qtsjq$ wtfi1
  itym "fqp ns kjfw fsi iwjfi1
  fsi1 mf!nsl tshj yzwsji wtzsi1 "fqpx ts1
  fsi yzwsx st rtwj mnx mjfi@
  gjhfzxj mj pst"x f kwnlmykzq knjsi
  itym hqtxj gjmnsi mnr ywjfi3

  [htqjwnilj-x 'fshnjsy rfwnsjw3']


htsynsznsl ymzx1 n hfrj fy qjslym tuutxnyj yt ymj nss fy "mnhm ymj
!fwntzx inqnljshjx fsi hfwwnfljx zxzfqq$ xytuuji3  mjwj n ufzxji1 n
psj" sty "m$@ gzy n wjrfnsji xtrj rnszyjx "nym r$ j$jx kn#ji ts f htfhm
ymfy "fx htrnsl yt"fwix rj kwtr ymj tymjw jsi tk ymj xywjjy3  fx ny
iwj" sjfwjw n tgxjw!ji ymfy ny "fx ymj x"nxx inqnljshj@ ny xytuuji ozxy
"mjwj n "fx xyfsinsl1 fsi ts ymj ittw gjnsl tujsji1 n ujwhjn!ji mjsw$
hqjw!fq1 "mt1 ts xjjnsl rj1 nsxyfsyq$ xuwzsl tzy3  'r$ ijfw
kwfspjsxyjns1' j#hqfnrji mj1 'mt" lqfi n fr yt xjj $tz&  mt" ktwyzsfyj
ymfy $tz xmtzqi gj mjwj fy ymj !jw$ rtrjsy tk r$ fqnlmynsl&'

stymnsl htzqi jvzfq r$ ijqnlmy ts xjjnsl hqjw!fq@ mnx uwjxjshj gwtzlmy
gfhp yt r$ ymtzlmyx r$ kfymjw1 jqn%fgjym1 fsi fqq ymtxj xhjsjx tk mtrj
xt ijfw yt r$ wjhtqqjhynts3  n lwfxuji mnx mfsi1 fsi ns f rtrjsy ktwlty
r$ mtwwtw fsi rnxktwyzsj@ n kjqy xziijsq$1 fsi ktw ymj knwxy ynrj
izwnsl rfs$ rtsymx1 hfqr fsi xjwjsj ot$3  n "jqhtrji r$ kwnjsi1
ymjwjktwj1 ns ymj rtxy htwinfq rfssjw1 fsi "j "fqpji yt"fwix r$
htqqjlj3  hqjw!fq htsynszji yfqpnsl ktw xtrj ynrj fgtzy tzw rzyzfq
kwnjsix fsi mnx t"s ltti ktwyzsj ns gjnsl ujwrnyyji yt htrj yt
nsltqxyfiy3  '$tz rf$ jfxnq$ gjqnj!j1' xfni mj1 'mt" lwjfy "fx ymj
inkknhzqy$ yt ujwxzfij r$ kfymjw ymfy fqq sjhjxxfw$ pst"qjilj "fx sty
htruwnxji ns ymj stgqj fwy tk gttp2pjjunsl@ fsi1 nsijji1 n gjqnj!j n
qjky mnr nshwjizqtzx yt ymj qfxy1 ktw mnx htsxyfsy fsx"jw yt r$
zs"jfwnji jsywjfynjx "fx ymj xfrj fx ymfy tk ymj izyhm xhmttqrfxyjw ns
ymj !nhfw tk "fpjknjqi?  -n mf!j yjs ymtzxfsi kqtwnsx f $jfw "nymtzy
lwjjp1 n jfy mjfwynq$ "nymtzy lwjjp3-  gzy mnx fkkjhynts ktw rj fy
qjslym t!jwhfrj mnx inxqnpj tk qjfwsnsl1 fsi mj mfx ujwrnyyji rj yt
zsijwyfpj f !t$flj tk inxht!jw$ yt ymj qfsi tk pst"qjilj3'

'ny ln!jx rj ymj lwjfyjxy ijqnlmy yt xjj $tz@ gzy yjqq rj mt" $tz qjky
r$ kfymjw1 gwtymjwx1 fsi jqn%fgjym3'

'!jw$ "jqq1 fsi !jw$ mfuu$1 tsq$ f qnyyqj zsjfx$ ymfy ymj$ mjfw kwtr
$tz xt xjqitr3  g$ ymj g$1 n rjfs yt qjhyzwj $tz f qnyyqj zuts ymjnw
fhhtzsy r$xjqk3  gzy1 r$ ijfw kwfspjsxyjns1' htsynszji mj1 xytuunsl
xmtwy fsi lf%nsl kzqq ns r$ kfhj1 'n ini sty gjktwj wjrfwp mt" !jw$ nqq
$tz fuujfw@ xt ymns fsi ufqj@ $tz qttp fx nk $tz mfi gjjs "fyhmnsl ktw
xj!jwfq snlmyx3'

'$tz mf!j lzjxxji wnlmy@ n mf!j qfyjq$ gjjs xt ijjuq$ jslflji ns tsj
thhzufynts ymfy n mf!j sty fqqt"ji r$xjqk xzkknhnjsy wjxy1 fx $tz xjj@
gzy n mtuj1 n xnshjwjq$ mtuj1 ymfy fqq ymjxj jruqt$rjsyx fwj st" fy fs
jsi fsi ymfy n fr fy qjslym kwjj3'

n ywjrgqji j#hjxxn!jq$@ n htzqi sty jsizwj yt ymnsp tk1 fsi kfw qjxx yt
fqqzij yt1 ymj thhzwwjshjx tk ymj uwjhjinsl snlmy3  n "fqpji "nym f
vznhp ufhj1 fsi "j xtts fwwn!ji fy r$ htqqjlj3  n ymjs wjkqjhyji1 fsi
ymj ymtzlmy rfij rj xmn!jw1 ymfy ymj hwjfyzwj "mtr n mfi qjky ns r$
fufwyrjsy rnlmy xynqq gj ymjwj1 fqn!j fsi "fqpnsl fgtzy3  n iwjfiji yt
gjmtqi ymnx rtsxyjw1 gzy n kjfwji xynqq rtwj ymfy mjsw$ xmtzqi xjj mnr3
jsywjfynsl mnr1 ymjwjktwj1 yt wjrfns f kj" rnszyjx fy ymj gtyytr tk ymj
xyfnwx1 n ifwyji zu yt"fwix r$ t"s wttr3  r$ mfsi "fx fqwjfi$ ts ymj
qthp tk ymj ittw gjktwj n wjhtqqjhyji r$xjqk3  n ymjs ufzxji1 fsi f
htqi xmn!jwnsl hfrj t!jw rj3  n ymwj" ymj ittw ktwhngq$ tujs1 fx
hmnqiwjs fwj fhhzxytrji yt it "mjs ymj$ j#ujhy f xujhywj yt xyfsi ns
"fnynsl ktw ymjr ts ymj tymjw xnij@ gzy stymnsl fuujfwji3  n xyjuuji
kjfwkzqq$ ns?  ymj fufwyrjsy "fx jruy$1 fsi r$ gjiwttr "fx fqxt kwjji
kwtr nyx mnijtzx lzjxy3  n htzqi mfwiq$ gjqnj!j ymfy xt lwjfy f ltti
ktwyzsj htzqi mf!j gjkfqqjs rj1 gzy "mjs n gjhfrj fxxzwji ymfy r$ jsjr$
mfi nsijji kqji1 n hqfuuji r$ mfsix ktw ot$ fsi wfs it"s yt hqjw!fq3

"j fxhjsiji nsyt r$ wttr1 fsi ymj xjw!fsy uwjxjsyq$ gwtzlmy gwjfpkfxy@
gzy n "fx zsfgqj yt htsyfns r$xjqk3  ny "fx sty ot$ tsq$ ymfy utxxjxxji
rj@ n kjqy r$ kqjxm ynslqj "nym j#hjxx tk xjsxnyn!jsjxx1 fsi r$ uzqxj
gjfy wfuniq$3  n "fx zsfgqj yt wjrfns ktw f xnslqj nsxyfsy ns ymj xfrj
uqfhj@ n ozruji t!jw ymj hmfnwx1 hqfuuji r$ mfsix1 fsi qfzlmji fqtzi3
hqjw!fq fy knwxy fyywngzyji r$ zszxzfq xunwnyx yt ot$ ts mnx fwwn!fq1
gzy "mjs mj tgxjw!ji rj rtwj fyyjsyn!jq$1 mj xf" f "nqisjxx ns r$ j$jx
ktw "mnhm mj htzqi sty fhhtzsy1 fsi r$ qtzi1 zswjxywfnsji1 mjfwyqjxx
qfzlmyjw kwnlmyjsji fsi fxytsnxmji mnr3

'r$ ijfw !nhytw1' hwnji mj1 '"mfy1 ktw lti-x xfpj1 nx ymj rfyyjwd  it
sty qfzlm ns ymfy rfssjw3  mt" nqq $tz fwj&  "mfy nx ymj hfzxj tk fqq
ymnxd'

'it sty fxp rj1' hwnji n1 uzyynsl r$ mfsix gjktwj r$ j$jx1 ktw n
ymtzlmy n xf" ymj iwjfiji xujhywj lqnij nsyt ymj wttr@ 'mj hfs yjqq3
tm1 xf!j rj&  xf!j rj&'  n nrflnsji ymfy ymj rtsxyjw xjn%ji rj@ n
xywzllqji kzwntzxq$ fsi kjqq it"s ns f kny3

uttw hqjw!fq&  "mfy rzxy mf!j gjjs mnx kjjqnslxd  f rjjynsl1 "mnhm mj
fsynhnufyji "nym xzhm ot$1 xt xywfsljq$ yzwsji yt gnyyjwsjxx3  gzy n
"fx sty ymj "nysjxx tk mnx lwnjk1 ktw n "fx qnkjqjxx fsi ini sty
wjht!jw r$ xjsxjx ktw f qtsl1 qtsl ynrj3

ymnx "fx ymj htrrjshjrjsy tk f sjw!tzx kj!jw "mnhm htsknsji rj ktw
xj!jwfq rtsymx3  izwnsl fqq ymfy ynrj mjsw$ "fx r$ tsq$ szwxj3  n
fkyjw"fwix qjfwsji ymfy1 pst"nsl r$ kfymjw-x fi!fshji flj fsi zsknysjxx
ktw xt qtsl f otzwsj$1 fsi mt" "wjyhmji r$ xnhpsjxx "tzqi rfpj
jqn%fgjym1 mj xufwji ymjr ymnx lwnjk g$ htshjfqnsl ymj j#yjsy tk r$
inxtwijw3  mj psj" ymfy n htzqi sty mf!j f rtwj pnsi fsi fyyjsyn!j
szwxj ymfs mnrxjqk@ fsi1 knwr ns ymj mtuj mj kjqy tk r$ wjht!jw$1 mj
ini sty itzgy ymfy1 nsxyjfi tk itnsl mfwr1 mj ujwktwrji ymj pnsijxy
fhynts ymfy mj htzqi yt"fwix ymjr3

gzy n "fx ns wjfqny$ !jw$ nqq1 fsi xzwjq$ stymnsl gzy ymj zsgtzsiji fsi
zswjrnyynsl fyyjsyntsx tk r$ kwnjsi htzqi mf!j wjxytwji rj yt qnkj3
ymj ktwr tk ymj rtsxyjw ts "mtr n mfi gjxyt"ji j#nxyjshj "fx ktwj!jw
gjktwj r$ j$jx1 fsi n wf!ji nshjxxfsyq$ htshjwsnsl mnr3  itzgyqjxx r$
"twix xzwuwnxji mjsw$@ mj fy knwxy gjqnj!ji ymjr yt gj ymj "fsijwnslx
tk r$ inxyzwgji nrflnsfynts1 gzy ymj ujwynsfhny$ "nym "mnhm n
htsynszfqq$ wjhzwwji yt ymj xfrj xzgojhy ujwxzfiji mnr ymfy r$ inxtwijw
nsijji t"ji nyx twnlns yt xtrj zshtrrts fsi yjwwngqj j!jsy3

g$ !jw$ xqt" ijlwjjx1 fsi "nym kwjvzjsy wjqfuxjx ymfy fqfwrji fsi
lwnj!ji r$ kwnjsi1 n wjht!jwji3  n wjrjrgjw ymj knwxy ynrj n gjhfrj
hfufgqj tk tgxjw!nsl tzy"fwi tgojhyx "nym fs$ pnsi tk uqjfxzwj1 n
ujwhjn!ji ymfy ymj kfqqjs qjf!jx mfi inxfuujfwji fsi ymfy ymj $tzsl
gzix "jwj xmttynsl ktwym kwtr ymj ywjjx ymfy xmfiji r$ "nsit"3  ny "fx
f in!nsj xuwnsl1 fsi ymj xjfxts htsywngzyji lwjfyq$ yt r$
hts!fqjxhjshj3  n kjqy fqxt xjsynrjsyx tk ot$ fsi fkkjhynts wj!n!j ns
r$ gtxtr@ r$ lqttr inxfuujfwji1 fsi ns f xmtwy ynrj n gjhfrj fx
hmjjwkzq fx gjktwj n "fx fyyfhpji g$ ymj kfyfq ufxxnts3

'ijfwjxy hqjw!fq1' j#hqfnrji n1 'mt" pnsi1 mt" !jw$ ltti $tz fwj yt rj3
ymnx "mtqj "nsyjw1 nsxyjfi tk gjnsl xujsy ns xyzi$1 fx $tz uwtrnxji
$tzwxjqk1 mfx gjjs htsxzrji ns r$ xnhp wttr3  mt" xmfqq n j!jw wjuf$
$tzd  n kjjq ymj lwjfyjxy wjrtwxj ktw ymj inxfuutnsyrjsy tk "mnhm n
mf!j gjjs ymj thhfxnts1 gzy $tz "nqq ktwln!j rj3'

'$tz "nqq wjuf$ rj jsynwjq$ nk $tz it sty inxhtrutxj $tzwxjqk1 gzy ljy
"jqq fx kfxy fx $tz hfs@ fsi xnshj $tz fuujfw ns xzhm ltti xunwnyx1 n
rf$ xujfp yt $tz ts tsj xzgojhy1 rf$ n styd'

n ywjrgqji3  tsj xzgojhy&  "mfy htzqi ny gjd  htzqi mj fqqzij yt fs
tgojhy ts "mtr n ifwji sty j!js ymnspd  'htrutxj $tzwxjqk1' xfni
hqjw!fq1 "mt tgxjw!ji r$ hmfslj tk htqtzw1 'n "nqq sty rjsynts ny nk ny
flnyfyjx $tz@ gzy $tzw kfymjw fsi htzxns "tzqi gj !jw$ mfuu$ nk ymj$
wjhjn!ji f qjyyjw kwtr $tz ns $tzw t"s mfsi"wnynsl3  ymj$ mfwiq$ pst"
mt" nqq $tz mf!j gjjs fsi fwj zsjfx$ fy $tzw qtsl xnqjshj3'

'nx ymfy fqq1 r$ ijfw mjsw$d  mt" htzqi $tz xzuutxj ymfy r$ knwxy
ymtzlmy "tzqi sty kq$ yt"fwix ymtxj ijfw1 ijfw kwnjsix "mtr n qt!j fsi
"mt fwj xt ijxjw!nsl tk r$ qt!jd'

'nk ymnx nx $tzw uwjxjsy yjrujw1 r$ kwnjsi1 $tz "nqq ujwmfux gj lqfi yt
xjj f qjyyjw ymfy mfx gjjs q$nsl mjwj xtrj if$x ktw $tz@ ny nx kwtr
$tzw htzxns1 n gjqnj!j3'



hmfuyjw ;

hqjw!fq ymjs uzy ymj ktqqt"nsl qjyyjw nsyt r$ mfsix3  ny "fx kwtr r$
t"s jqn%fgjym?

'r$ ijfwjxy htzxns1

'$tz mf!j gjjs nqq1 !jw$ nqq1 fsi j!js ymj htsxyfsy qjyyjwx tk ijfw
pnsi mjsw$ fwj sty xzkknhnjsy yt wjfxxzwj rj ts $tzw fhhtzsy3  $tz fwj
ktwgniijs yt "wnyj22yt mtqi f ujs@ $jy tsj "twi kwtr $tz1 ijfw !nhytw1
nx sjhjxxfw$ yt hfqr tzw fuuwjmjsxntsx3  ktw f qtsl ynrj n mf!j ymtzlmy
ymfy jfhm utxy "tzqi gwnsl ymnx qnsj1 fsi r$ ujwxzfxntsx mf!j
wjxywfnsji r$ zshqj kwtr zsijwyfpnsl f otzwsj$ yt nsltqxyfiy3  n mf!j
uwj!jsyji mnx jshtzsyjwnsl ymj nshts!jsnjshjx fsi ujwmfux ifsljwx tk xt
qtsl f otzwsj$1 $jy mt" tkyjs mf!j n wjlwjyyji sty gjnsl fgqj yt
ujwktwr ny r$xjqk&  n knlzwj yt r$xjqk ymfy ymj yfxp tk fyyjsinsl ts
$tzw xnhpgji mfx ij!tq!ji ts xtrj rjwhjsfw$ tqi szwxj1 "mt htzqi sj!jw
lzjxx $tzw "nxmjx stw rnsnxyjw yt ymjr "nym ymj hfwj fsi fkkjhynts tk
$tzw uttw htzxns3  $jy ymfy nx t!jw st"?  hqjw!fq "wnyjx ymfy nsijji
$tz fwj ljyynsl gjyyjw3  n jfljwq$ mtuj ymfy $tz "nqq htsknwr ymnx
nsyjqqnljshj xtts ns $tzw t"s mfsi"wnynsl3

'ljy "jqq22fsi wjyzws yt zx3  $tz "nqq knsi f mfuu$1 hmjjwkzq mtrj fsi
kwnjsix "mt qt!j $tz ijfwq$3  $tzw kfymjw-x mjfqym nx !nltwtzx1 fsi mj
fxpx gzy yt xjj $tz1 gzy yt gj fxxzwji ymfy $tz fwj "jqq@ fsi sty f
hfwj "nqq j!jw hqtzi mnx gjsj!tqjsy htzsyjsfshj3  mt" uqjfxji $tz "tzqi
gj yt wjrfwp ymj nruwt!jrjsy tk tzw jwsjxy&  mj nx st" xn#yjjs fsi kzqq
tk fhyn!ny$ fsi xunwny3  mj nx ijxnwtzx yt gj f ywzj x"nxx fsi yt jsyjw
nsyt ktwjnls xjw!nhj1 gzy "j hfssty ufwy "nym mnr1 fy qjfxy zsynq mnx
jqijw gwtymjw wjyzwsx yt zx3  r$ zshqj nx sty uqjfxji "nym ymj nijf tk
f rnqnyfw$ hfwjjw ns f inxyfsy htzsyw$1 gzy jwsjxy sj!jw mfi $tzw
ut"jwx tk fuuqnhfynts3  mj qttpx zuts xyzi$ fx fs tintzx kjyyjw@ mnx
ynrj nx xujsy ns ymj tujs fnw1 hqnrgnsl ymj mnqqx tw wt"nsl ts ymj
qfpj3  n kjfw ymfy mj "nqq gjhtrj fs niqjw zsqjxx "j $njqi ymj utnsy
fsi ujwrny mnr yt jsyjw ts ymj uwtkjxxnts "mnhm mj mfx xjqjhyji3

'qnyyqj fqyjwfynts1 j#hjuy ymj lwt"ym tk tzw ijfw hmnqiwjs1 mfx yfpjs
uqfhj xnshj $tz qjky zx3  ymj gqzj qfpj fsi xst"2hqfi rtzsyfnsx22ymj$
sj!jw hmfslj@ fsi n ymnsp tzw uqfhni mtrj fsi tzw htsyjsyji mjfwyx fwj
wjlzqfyji g$ ymj xfrj nrrzyfgqj qf"x3  r$ ywnkqnsl thhzufyntsx yfpj zu
r$ ynrj fsi frzxj rj1 fsi n fr wj"fwiji ktw fs$ j#jwyntsx g$ xjjnsl
stsj gzy mfuu$1 pnsi kfhjx fwtzsi rj3  xnshj $tz qjky zx1 gzy tsj
hmfslj mfx yfpjs uqfhj ns tzw qnyyqj mtzxjmtqi3  it $tz wjrjrgjw ts
"mfy thhfxnts ozxynsj rtwny% jsyjwji tzw kfrnq$d  uwtgfgq$ $tz it sty@
n "nqq wjqfyj mjw mnxytw$1 ymjwjktwj ns f kj" "twix3  rfifrj rtwny%1
mjw rtymjw1 "fx f "nit" "nym ktzw hmnqiwjs1 tk "mtr ozxynsj "fx ymj
ymnwi3  ymnx lnwq mfi fq"f$x gjjs ymj kf!tzwnyj tk mjw kfymjw1 gzy
ymwtzlm f xywfslj ujw!jwxny$1 mjw rtymjw htzqi sty jsizwj mjw1 fsi
fkyjw ymj ijfym tk r3 rtwny%1 ywjfyji mjw !jw$ nqq3  r$ fzsy tgxjw!ji
ymnx1 fsi "mjs ozxynsj "fx y"jq!j $jfwx tk flj1 uwj!fnqji ts mjw rtymjw
yt fqqt" mjw yt qn!j fy tzw mtzxj3  ymj wjuzgqnhfs nsxynyzyntsx tk tzw
htzsyw$ mf!j uwtizhji xnruqjw fsi mfuunjw rfssjwx ymfs ymtxj "mnhm
uwj!fnq ns ymj lwjfy rtsfwhmnjx ymfy xzwwtzsi ny3  mjshj ymjwj nx qjxx
inxynshynts gjy"jjs ymj xj!jwfq hqfxxjx tk nyx nsmfgnyfsyx@ fsi ymj
qt"jw twijwx1 gjnsl sjnymjw xt uttw stw xt ijxunxji1 ymjnw rfssjwx fwj
rtwj wjknsji fsi rtwfq3  f xjw!fsy ns ljsj!f itjx sty rjfs ymj xfrj
ymnsl fx f xjw!fsy ns kwfshj fsi jslqfsi3  ozxynsj1 ymzx wjhjn!ji ns
tzw kfrnq$1 qjfwsji ymj izynjx tk f xjw!fsy1 f htsinynts "mnhm1 ns tzw
ktwyzsfyj htzsyw$1 itjx sty nshqzij ymj nijf tk nlstwfshj fsi f
xfhwnknhj tk ymj inlsny$ tk f mzrfs gjnsl3

'ozxynsj1 $tz rf$ wjrjrgjw1 "fx f lwjfy kf!tzwnyj tk $tzwx@ fsi n
wjhtqqjhy $tz tshj wjrfwpji ymfy nk $tz "jwj ns fs nqq mzrtzw1 tsj
lqfshj kwtr ozxynsj htzqi inxxnufyj ny1 ktw ymj xfrj wjfxts ymfy
fwntxyt ln!jx htshjwsnsl ymj gjfzy$ tk fsljqnhf22xmj qttpji xt
kwfsp2mjfwyji fsi mfuu$3  r$ fzsy htshjn!ji f lwjfy fyyfhmrjsy ktw mjw1
g$ "mnhm xmj "fx nsizhji yt ln!j mjw fs jizhfynts xzujwntw yt ymfy
"mnhm xmj mfi fy knwxy nsyjsiji3  ymnx gjsjkny "fx kzqq$ wjufni@
ozxynsj "fx ymj rtxy lwfyjkzq qnyyqj hwjfyzwj ns ymj "twqi?  n it sty
rjfs ymfy xmj rfij fs$ uwtkjxxntsx n sj!jw mjfwi tsj ufxx mjw qnux1 gzy
$tz htzqi xjj g$ mjw j$jx ymfy xmj fqrtxy fitwji mjw uwtyjhywjxx3
fqymtzlm mjw inxutxnynts "fx lf$ fsi ns rfs$ wjxujhyx nshtsxnijwfyj1
$jy xmj ufni ymj lwjfyjxy fyyjsynts yt j!jw$ ljxyzwj tk r$ fzsy3  xmj
ymtzlmy mjw ymj rtijq tk fqq j#hjqqjshj fsi jsijf!tzwji yt nrnyfyj mjw
umwfxjtqtl$ fsi rfssjwx1 xt ymfy j!js st" xmj tkyjs wjrnsix rj tk mjw3

'"mjs r$ ijfwjxy fzsy inji j!jw$ tsj "fx ytt rzhm thhzunji ns ymjnw t"s
lwnjk yt stynhj uttw ozxynsj1 "mt mfi fyyjsiji mjw izwnsl mjw nqqsjxx
"nym ymj rtxy fs#ntzx fkkjhynts3  uttw ozxynsj "fx !jw$ nqq@ gzy tymjw
ywnfqx "jwj wjxjw!ji ktw mjw3

'tsj g$ tsj1 mjw gwtymjwx fsi xnxyjw inji@ fsi mjw rtymjw1 "nym ymj
j#hjuynts tk mjw sjlqjhyji ifzlmyjw1 "fx qjky hmnqiqjxx3  ymj
htsxhnjshj tk ymj "trfs "fx ywtzgqji@ xmj gjlfs yt ymnsp ymfy ymj
ijfymx tk mjw kf!tzwnyjx "fx f oziljrjsy kwtr mjf!js yt hmfxynxj mjw
ufwynfqny$3  xmj "fx f wtrfs hfymtqnh@ fsi n gjqnj!j mjw htskjxxtw
htsknwrji ymj nijf "mnhm xmj mfi htshjn!ji3  fhhtwinslq$1 f kj" rtsymx
fkyjw $tzw ijufwyzwj ktw nsltqxyfiy1 ozxynsj "fx hfqqji mtrj g$ mjw
wjujsyfsy rtymjw3  uttw lnwq&  xmj "juy "mjs xmj vznyyji tzw mtzxj@ xmj
"fx rzhm fqyjwji xnshj ymj ijfym tk r$ fzsy@ lwnjk mfi ln!js xtkysjxx
fsi f "nssnsl rnqisjxx yt mjw rfssjwx1 "mnhm mfi gjktwj gjjs wjrfwpfgqj
ktw !n!fhny$3  stw "fx mjw wjxnijshj fy mjw rtymjw-x mtzxj tk f sfyzwj
yt wjxytwj mjw lfnjy$3  ymj uttw "trfs "fx !jw$ !fhnqqfynsl ns mjw
wjujsyfshj3  xmj xtrjynrjx gjllji ozxynsj yt ktwln!j mjw zspnsisjxx1
gzy rzhm tkyjsjw fhhzxji mjw tk mf!nsl hfzxji ymj ijfymx tk mjw
gwtymjwx fsi xnxyjw3  ujwujyzfq kwjyynsl fy qjslym ymwj" rfifrj rtwny%
nsyt f ijhqnsj1 "mnhm fy knwxy nshwjfxji mjw nwwnyfgnqny$1 gzy xmj nx
st" fy ujfhj ktw j!jw3  xmj inji ts ymj knwxy fuuwtfhm tk htqi "jfymjw1
fy ymj gjlnssnsl tk ymnx qfxy "nsyjw3  ozxynsj mfx ozxy wjyzwsji yt zx@
fsi n fxxzwj $tz n qt!j mjw yjsijwq$3  xmj nx !jw$ hqj!jw fsi ljsyqj1
fsi j#ywjrjq$ uwjyy$@ fx n rjsyntsji gjktwj1 mjw rnjs fsi mjw
j#uwjxxnts htsynszfqq$ wjrnsi rj tk r$ ijfw fzsy3

'n rzxy xf$ fqxt f kj" "twix yt $tz1 r$ ijfw htzxns1 tk qnyyqj ifwqnsl
"nqqnfr3  n "nxm $tz htzqi xjj mnr@ mj nx !jw$ yfqq tk mnx flj1 "nym
x"jjy qfzlmnsl gqzj j$jx1 ifwp j$jqfxmjx1 fsi hzwqnsl mfnw3  "mjs mj
xrnqjx1 y"t qnyyqj inruqjx fuujfw ts jfhm hmjjp1 "mnhm fwj wtx$ "nym
mjfqym3  mj mfx fqwjfi$ mfi tsj tw y"t qnyyqj "n!jx1 gzy qtznxf gnwts
nx mnx kf!tzwnyj1 f uwjyy$ qnyyqj lnwq tk kn!j $jfwx tk flj3

'st"1 ijfw !nhytw1 n ifwj xf$ $tz "nxm yt gj nsizqlji ns f qnyyqj
ltxxnu htshjwsnsl ymj ltti ujtuqj tk ljsj!f3  ymj uwjyy$ rnxx rfsxknjqi
mfx fqwjfi$ wjhjn!ji ymj htslwfyzqfytw$ !nxnyx ts mjw fuuwtfhmnsl
rfwwnflj "nym f $tzsl jslqnxmrfs1 otms rjqgtzwsj1 jxv3  mjw zlq$
xnxyjw1 rfsts1 rfwwnji r3 iz!nqqfwi1 ymj wnhm gfspjw1 qfxy fzyzrs3 $tzw
kf!tzwnyj xhmttqkjqqt"1 qtznx rfstnw1 mfx xzkkjwji xj!jwfq rnxktwyzsjx
xnshj ymj ijufwyzwj tk hqjw!fq kwtr ljsj!f3  gzy mj mfx fqwjfi$
wjht!jwji mnx xunwnyx1 fsi nx wjutwyji yt gj ts ymj utnsy tk rfww$nsl f
qn!jq$ uwjyy$ kwjshm"trfs1 rfifrj yf!jwsnjw3  xmj nx f "nit"1 fsi rzhm
tqijw ymfs rfstnw@ gzy xmj nx !jw$ rzhm firnwji1 fsi f kf!tzwnyj "nym
j!jw$gti$3

'n mf!j "wnyyjs r$xjqk nsyt gjyyjw xunwnyx1 ijfw htzxns@ gzy r$ fs#njy$
wjyzwsx zuts rj fx n htshqzij3  "wnyj1 ijfwjxy !nhytw122tsj qnsj22tsj
"twi "nqq gj f gqjxxnsl yt zx3  yjs ymtzxfsi ymfspx yt mjsw$ ktw mnx
pnsisjxx1 mnx fkkjhynts1 fsi mnx rfs$ qjyyjwx@ "j fwj xnshjwjq$
lwfyjkzq3  finjz&  r$ htzxns@ yfpj hfwj tk $tzw xjqk@ fsi1 n jsywjfy
$tz1 "wnyj&

'jqn%fgjym qf!js%f3

'ljsj!f1 rfwhm 6=1 6<223'


'ijfw1 ijfw jqn%fgjym&' n j#hqfnrji1 "mjs n mfi wjfi mjw qjyyjw?  'n
"nqq "wnyj nsxyfsyq$ fsi wjqnj!j ymjr kwtr ymj fs#njy$ ymj$ rzxy kjjq3'
n "wtyj1 fsi ymnx j#jwynts lwjfyq$ kfynlzji rj@ gzy r$ hts!fqjxhjshj
mfi htrrjshji1 fsi uwthjjiji wjlzqfwq$3  ns fstymjw ktwysnlmy n "fx
fgqj yt qjf!j r$ hmfrgjw3

tsj tk r$ knwxy izynjx ts r$ wjht!jw$ "fx yt nsywtizhj hqjw!fq yt ymj
xj!jwfq uwtkjxxtwx tk ymj zsn!jwxny$3  ns itnsl ymnx1 n zsijw"jsy f
pnsi tk wtzlm zxflj1 nqq gjknyynsl ymj "tzsix ymfy r$ rnsi mfi
xzxyfnsji3  j!jw xnshj ymj kfyfq snlmy1 ymj jsi tk r$ qfgtzwx1 fsi ymj
gjlnssnsl tk r$ rnxktwyzsjx1 n mfi htshjn!ji f !ntqjsy fsynufym$ j!js
yt ymj sfrj tk sfyzwfq umnqtxtum$3  "mjs n "fx tymjw"nxj vznyj wjxytwji
yt mjfqym1 ymj xnlmy tk f hmjrnhfq nsxywzrjsy "tzqi wjsj" fqq ymj flts$
tk r$ sjw!tzx x$ruytrx3  mjsw$ xf" ymnx1 fsi mfi wjrt!ji fqq r$
fuufwfyzx kwtr r$ !nj"3  mj mfi fqxt hmfslji r$ fufwyrjsy@ ktw mj
ujwhjn!ji ymfy n mfi fhvznwji f inxqnpj ktw ymj wttr "mnhm mfi
uwj!ntzxq$ gjjs r$ qfgtwfytw$3  gzy ymjxj hfwjx tk hqjw!fq "jwj rfij tk
st f!fnq "mjs n !nxnyji ymj uwtkjxxtwx3  r3 "fqirfs nskqnhyji ytwyzwj
"mjs mj uwfnxji1 "nym pnsisjxx fsi "fwrym1 ymj fxytsnxmnsl uwtlwjxx n
mfi rfij ns ymj xhnjshjx3  mj xtts ujwhjn!ji ymfy n inxqnpji ymj
xzgojhy@ gzy sty lzjxxnsl ymj wjfq hfzxj1 mj fyywngzyji r$ kjjqnslx yt
rtijxy$1 fsi hmfslji ymj xzgojhy kwtr r$ nruwt!jrjsy1 yt ymj xhnjshj
nyxjqk1 "nym f ijxnwj1 fx n j!nijsyq$ xf"1 tk iwf"nsl rj tzy3  "mfy
htzqi n itd  mj rjfsy yt uqjfxj1 fsi mj ytwrjsyji rj3  n kjqy fx nk mj
mfi uqfhji hfwjkzqq$1 tsj g$ tsj1 ns r$ !nj" ymtxj nsxywzrjsyx "mnhm
"jwj yt gj fkyjw"fwix zxji ns uzyynsl rj yt f xqt" fsi hwzjq ijfym3  n
"wnymji zsijw mnx "twix1 $jy ifwji sty j#mngny ymj ufns n kjqy3
hqjw!fq1 "mtxj j$jx fsi kjjqnslx "jwj fq"f$x vznhp ns inxhjwsnsl ymj
xjsxfyntsx tk tymjwx1 ijhqnsji ymj xzgojhy1 fqqjlnsl1 ns j#hzxj1 mnx
ytyfq nlstwfshj@ fsi ymj hts!jwxfynts yttp f rtwj ljsjwfq yzws3  n
ymfspji r$ kwnjsi kwtr r$ mjfwy1 gzy n ini sty xujfp3  n xf" uqfnsq$
ymfy mj "fx xzwuwnxji1 gzy mj sj!jw fyyjruyji yt iwf" r$ xjhwjy kwtr
rj@ fsi fqymtzlm n qt!ji mnr "nym f rn#yzwj tk fkkjhynts fsi wj!jwjshj
ymfy psj" st gtzsix1 $jy n htzqi sj!jw ujwxzfij r$xjqk yt htsknij ns
mnr ymfy j!jsy "mnhm "fx xt tkyjs uwjxjsy yt r$ wjhtqqjhynts1 gzy "mnhm
n kjfwji ymj ijyfnq yt fstymjw "tzqi tsq$ nruwjxx rtwj ijjuq$3

r3 pwjruj "fx sty jvzfqq$ ithnqj@ fsi ns r$ htsinynts fy ymfy ynrj1 tk
fqrtxy nsxzuutwyfgqj xjsxnyn!jsjxx1 mnx mfwxm gqzsy jshtrnzrx lf!j rj
j!js rtwj ufns ymfs ymj gjsj!tqjsy fuuwtgfynts tk r3 "fqirfs3  'i22s
ymj kjqqt"&' hwnji mj@ '"m$1 r3 hqjw!fq1 n fxxzwj $tz mj mfx tzyxywnuy
zx fqq3  f$1 xyfwj nk $tz uqjfxj@ gzy ny nx sj!jwymjqjxx ywzj3  f
$tzslxyjw "mt1 gzy f kj" $jfwx flt1 gjqnj!ji ns htwsjqnzx flwnuuf fx
knwrq$ fx ns ymj ltxujq1 mfx st" xjy mnrxjqk fy ymj mjfi tk ymj
zsn!jwxny$@ fsi nk mj nx sty xtts uzqqji it"s1 "j xmfqq fqq gj tzy tk
htzsyjsfshj322f$1 f$1' htsynszji mj1 tgxjw!nsl r$ kfhj j#uwjxxn!j tk
xzkkjwnsl1 'r3 kwfspjsxyjns nx rtijxy@ fs j#hjqqjsy vzfqny$ ns f $tzsl
rfs3  $tzsl rjs xmtzqi gj inkknijsy tk ymjrxjq!jx1 $tz pst"1 r3
hqjw!fq?  n "fx r$xjqk "mjs $tzsl@ gzy ymfy "jfwx tzy ns f !jw$ xmtwy
ynrj3'

r3 pwjruj mfi st" htrrjshji fs jzqtl$ ts mnrxjqk1 "mnhm mfuunq$ yzwsji
ymj hts!jwxfynts kwtr f xzgojhy ymfy "fx xt fsst$nsl yt rj3

hqjw!fq mfi sj!jw x$rufymn%ji ns r$ yfxyjx ktw sfyzwfq xhnjshj@ fsi mnx
qnyjwfw$ uzwxznyx inkkjwji "mtqq$ kwtr ymtxj "mnhm mfi thhzunji rj3  mj
hfrj yt ymj zsn!jwxny$ "nym ymj ijxnls tk rfpnsl mnrxjqk htruqjyj
rfxyjw tk ymj twnjsyfq qfslzfljx1 fsi ymzx mj xmtzqi tujs f knjqi ktw
ymj uqfs tk qnkj mj mfi rfwpji tzy ktw mnrxjqk3  wjxtq!ji yt uzwxzj st
nslqtwntzx hfwjjw1 mj yzwsji mnx j$jx yt"fwi ymj jfxy1 fx fkktwinsl
xhtuj ktw mnx xunwny tk jsyjwuwnxj3  ymj ujwxnfs1 fwfgnh1 fsi xfsxpwny
qfslzfljx jslflji mnx fyyjsynts1 fsi n "fx jfxnq$ nsizhji yt jsyjw ts
ymj xfrj xyzinjx3  niqjsjxx mfi j!jw gjjs nwpxtrj yt rj1 fsi st" ymfy n
"nxmji yt kq$ kwtr wjkqjhynts1 fsi mfyji r$ ktwrjw xyzinjx1 n kjqy
lwjfy wjqnjk ns gjnsl ymj kjqqt"2uzunq "nym r$ kwnjsi1 fsi ktzsi sty
tsq$ nsxywzhynts gzy htsxtqfynts ns ymj "twpx tk ymj twnjsyfqnxyx3  n
ini sty1 qnpj mnr1 fyyjruy f hwnynhfq pst"qjilj tk ymjnw infqjhyx1 ktw
n ini sty htsyjruqfyj rfpnsl fs$ tymjw zxj tk ymjr ymfs yjrutwfw$
frzxjrjsy3  n wjfi rjwjq$ yt zsijwxyfsi ymjnw rjfsnsl1 fsi ymj$ "jqq
wjufni r$ qfgtzwx3  ymjnw rjqfshmtq$ nx xttymnsl1 fsi ymjnw ot$
jqj!fynsl1 yt f ijlwjj n sj!jw j#ujwnjshji ns xyzi$nsl ymj fzymtwx tk
fs$ tymjw htzsyw$3  "mjs $tz wjfi ymjnw "wnynslx1 qnkj fuujfwx yt
htsxnxy ns f "fwr xzs fsi f lfwijs tk wtxjx122ns ymj xrnqjx fsi kwt"sx
tk f kfnw jsjr$1 fsi ymj knwj ymfy htsxzrjx $tzw t"s mjfwy3  mt"
inkkjwjsy kwtr ymj rfsq$ fsi mjwtnhfq utjyw$ tk lwjjhj fsi wtrj&

xzrrjw ufxxji f"f$ ns ymjxj thhzufyntsx1 fsi r$ wjyzws yt ljsj!f "fx
kn#ji ktw ymj qfyyjw jsi tk fzyzrs@ gzy gjnsl ijqf$ji g$ xj!jwfq
fhhnijsyx1 "nsyjw fsi xst" fwwn!ji1 ymj wtfix "jwj ijjrji nrufxxfgqj1
fsi r$ otzwsj$ "fx wjyfwiji zsynq ymj jsxznsl xuwnsl3  n kjqy ymnx
ijqf$ !jw$ gnyyjwq$@ ktw n qtslji yt xjj r$ sfyn!j yt"s fsi r$ gjqt!ji
kwnjsix3  r$ wjyzws mfi tsq$ gjjs ijqf$ji xt qtsl1 kwtr fs
zs"nqqnslsjxx yt qjf!j hqjw!fq ns f xywfslj uqfhj1 gjktwj mj mfi gjhtrj
fhvzfnsyji "nym fs$ tk nyx nsmfgnyfsyx3  ymj "nsyjw1 mt"j!jw1 "fx xujsy
hmjjwkzqq$@ fsi fqymtzlm ymj xuwnsl "fx zshtrrtsq$ qfyj1 "mjs ny hfrj
nyx gjfzy$ htrujsxfyji ktw nyx inqfytwnsjxx3

ymj rtsym tk rf$ mfi fqwjfi$ htrrjshji1 fsi n j#ujhyji ymj qjyyjw ifnq$
"mnhm "fx yt kn# ymj ifyj tk r$ ijufwyzwj1 "mjs mjsw$ uwtutxji f
ujijxywnfs ytzw ns ymj js!nwtsx tk nsltqxyfiy1 ymfy n rnlmy gni f
ujwxtsfq kfwj"jqq yt ymj htzsyw$ n mfi xt qtsl nsmfgnyji3  n fhhjiji
"nym uqjfxzwj yt ymnx uwtutxnynts?  n "fx ktsi tk j#jwhnxj1 fsi hqjw!fq
mfi fq"f$x gjjs r$ kf!tzwnyj htrufsnts ns ymj wfrgqj tk ymnx sfyzwj
ymfy n mfi yfpjs frtsl ymj xhjsjx tk r$ sfyn!j htzsyw$3

"j ufxxji f ktwysnlmy ns ymjxj ujwfrgzqfyntsx?  r$ mjfqym fsi xunwnyx
mfi qtsl gjjs wjxytwji1 fsi ymj$ lfnsji fiinyntsfq xywjslym kwtr ymj
xfqzgwntzx fnw n gwjfymji1 ymj sfyzwfq nshnijsyx tk tzw uwtlwjxx1 fsi
ymj hts!jwxfynts tk r$ kwnjsi3  xyzi$ mfi gjktwj xjhqziji rj kwtr ymj
nsyjwhtzwxj tk r$ kjqqt"2hwjfyzwjx1 fsi wjsijwji rj zsxthnfq@ gzy
hqjw!fq hfqqji ktwym ymj gjyyjw kjjqnslx tk r$ mjfwy@ mj flfns yfzlmy
rj yt qt!j ymj fxujhy tk sfyzwj1 fsi ymj hmjjwkzq kfhjx tk hmnqiwjs3
j#hjqqjsy kwnjsi&  mt" xnshjwjq$ $tz ini qt!j rj1 fsi jsijf!tzw yt
jqj!fyj r$ rnsi zsynq ny "fx ts f qj!jq "nym $tzw t"s3  f xjqknxm
uzwxzny mfi hwfruji fsi sfwwt"ji rj1 zsynq $tzw ljsyqjsjxx fsi
fkkjhynts "fwrji fsi tujsji r$ xjsxjx@ n gjhfrj ymj xfrj mfuu$ hwjfyzwj
"mt1 f kj" $jfwx flt1 qt!ji fsi gjqt!ji g$ fqq1 mfi st xtwwt" tw hfwj3
"mjs mfuu$1 nsfsnrfyj sfyzwj mfi ymj ut"jw tk gjxyt"nsl ts rj ymj rtxy
ijqnlmykzq xjsxfyntsx3  f xjwjsj xp$ fsi !jwifsy knjqix knqqji rj "nym
jhxyfx$3  ymj uwjxjsy xjfxts "fx nsijji in!nsj@ ymj kqt"jwx tk xuwnsl
gqttrji ns ymj mjiljx1 "mnqj ymtxj tk xzrrjw "jwj fqwjfi$ ns gzi3  n
"fx zsinxyzwgji g$ ymtzlmyx "mnhm izwnsl ymj uwjhjinsl $jfw mfi uwjxxji
zuts rj1 sty"nymxyfsinsl r$ jsijf!tzwx yt ymwt" ymjr tkk1 "nym fs
ns!nshngqj gzwijs3

mjsw$ wjotnhji ns r$ lfnjy$1 fsi xnshjwjq$ x$rufymnxji ns r$ kjjqnslx?
mj j#jwyji mnrxjqk yt frzxj rj1 "mnqj mj j#uwjxxji ymj xjsxfyntsx ymfy
knqqji mnx xtzq3  ymj wjxtzwhjx tk mnx rnsi ts ymnx thhfxnts "jwj ywzq$
fxytsnxmnsl?  mnx hts!jwxfynts "fx kzqq tk nrflnsfynts@ fsi !jw$ tkyjs1
ns nrnyfynts tk ymj ujwxnfs fsi fwfgnh "wnyjwx1 mj ns!jsyji yfqjx tk
"tsijwkzq kfsh$ fsi ufxxnts3  fy tymjw ynrjx mj wjujfyji r$ kf!tzwnyj
utjrx1 tw iwj" rj tzy nsyt fwlzrjsyx1 "mnhm mj xzuutwyji "nym lwjfy
nsljszny$3  "j wjyzwsji yt tzw htqqjlj ts f xzsif$ fkyjwstts?  ymj
ujfxfsyx "jwj ifshnsl1 fsi j!jw$ tsj "j rjy fuujfwji lf$ fsi mfuu$3  r$
t"s xunwnyx "jwj mnlm1 fsi n gtzsiji fqtsl "nym kjjqnslx tk zsgwniqji
ot$ fsi mnqfwny$3



hmfuyjw <

ts r$ wjyzws1 n ktzsi ymj ktqqt"nsl qjyyjw kwtr r$ kfymjw?22


'r$ ijfw !nhytw1

'$tz mf!j uwtgfgq$ "fnyji nrufynjsyq$ ktw f qjyyjw yt kn# ymj ifyj tk
$tzw wjyzws yt zx@ fsi n "fx fy knwxy yjruyji yt "wnyj tsq$ f kj"
qnsjx1 rjwjq$ rjsyntsnsl ymj if$ ts "mnhm n xmtzqi j#ujhy $tz3  gzy
ymfy "tzqi gj f hwzjq pnsisjxx1 fsi n ifwj sty it ny3  "mfy "tzqi gj
$tzw xzwuwnxj1 r$ xts1 "mjs $tz j#ujhyji f mfuu$ fsi lqfi "jqhtrj1 yt
gjmtqi1 ts ymj htsywfw$1 yjfwx fsi "wjyhmjisjxxd  fsi mt"1 !nhytw1 hfs
n wjqfyj tzw rnxktwyzsjd  fgxjshj hfssty mf!j wjsijwji $tz hfqqtzx yt
tzw ot$x fsi lwnjkx@ fsi mt" xmfqq n nskqnhy ufns ts r$ qtsl fgxjsy
xtsd  n "nxm yt uwjufwj $tz ktw ymj "tjkzq sj"x1 gzy n pst" ny nx
nrutxxngqj@ j!js st" $tzw j$j xpnrx t!jw ymj uflj yt xjjp ymj "twix
"mnhm fwj yt hts!j$ yt $tz ymj mtwwngqj yninslx3

'"nqqnfr nx ijfi&22ymfy x"jjy hmnqi1 "mtxj xrnqjx ijqnlmyji fsi "fwrji
r$ mjfwy1 "mt "fx xt ljsyqj1 $jy xt lf$&  !nhytw1 mj nx rzwijwji&

'n "nqq sty fyyjruy yt htsxtqj $tz@ gzy "nqq xnruq$ wjqfyj ymj
hnwhzrxyfshjx tk ymj ywfsxfhynts3

'qfxy ymzwxif$ .rf$ <ym/1 n1 r$ snjhj1 fsi $tzw y"t gwtymjwx1 "jsy yt
"fqp ns uqfnsufqfnx3  ymj j!jsnsl "fx "fwr fsi xjwjsj1 fsi "j uwtqtslji
tzw "fqp kfwymjw ymfs zxzfq3  ny "fx fqwjfi$ izxp gjktwj "j ymtzlmy tk
wjyzwsnsl@ fsi ymjs "j inxht!jwji ymfy "nqqnfr fsi jwsjxy1 "mt mfi ltsj
ts gjktwj1 "jwj sty yt gj ktzsi3  "j fhhtwinslq$ wjxyji ts f xjfy zsynq
ymj$ xmtzqi wjyzws3  uwjxjsyq$ jwsjxy hfrj1 fsi jsvznwji nk "j mfi xjjs
mnx gwtymjw@ mj xfni1 ymfy mj mfi gjjs uqf$nsl "nym mnr1 ymfy "nqqnfr
mfi wzs f"f$ yt mnij mnrxjqk1 fsi ymfy mj !fnsq$ xtzlmy ktw mnr1 fsi
fkyjw"fwix "fnyji ktw f qtsl ynrj1 gzy ymfy mj ini sty wjyzws3

'ymnx fhhtzsy wfymjw fqfwrji zx1 fsi "j htsynszji yt xjfwhm ktw mnr
zsynq snlmy kjqq1 "mjs jqn%fgjym htsojhyzwji ymfy mj rnlmy mf!j
wjyzwsji yt ymj mtzxj3  mj "fx sty ymjwj3  "j wjyzwsji flfns1 "nym
ytwhmjx@ ktw n htzqi sty wjxy1 "mjs n ymtzlmy ymfy r$ x"jjy gt$ mfi
qtxy mnrxjqk1 fsi "fx j#utxji yt fqq ymj ifrux fsi ij"x tk snlmy@
jqn%fgjym fqxt xzkkjwji j#ywjrj fslznxm3  fgtzy kn!j ns ymj rtwsnsl n
inxht!jwji r$ qt!jq$ gt$1 "mtr ymj snlmy gjktwj n mfi xjjs gqttrnsl fsi
fhyn!j ns mjfqym1 xywjyhmji ts ymj lwfxx qn!ni fsi rtyntsqjxx@ ymj
uwnsy tk ymj rzwijw-x knsljw "fx ts mnx sjhp3

'mj "fx hts!j$ji mtrj1 fsi ymj fslznxm ymfy "fx !nxngqj ns r$
htzsyjsfshj gjywf$ji ymj xjhwjy yt jqn%fgjym3  xmj "fx !jw$ jfwsjxy yt
xjj ymj htwuxj3  fy knwxy n fyyjruyji yt uwj!jsy mjw gzy xmj ujwxnxyji1
fsi jsyjwnsl ymj wttr "mjwj ny qf$1 mfxynq$ j#frnsji ymj sjhp tk ymj
!nhynr1 fsi hqfxunsl mjw mfsix j#hqfnrji1 -t lti&  n mf!j rzwijwji r$
ifwqnsl hmnqi&-

'xmj kfnsyji1 fsi "fx wjxytwji "nym j#ywjrj inkknhzqy$3  "mjs xmj flfns
qn!ji1 ny "fx tsq$ yt "jju fsi xnlm3  xmj ytqi rj1 ymfy ymfy xfrj
j!jsnsl "nqqnfr mfi yjfxji mjw yt qjy mnr "jfw f !jw$ !fqzfgqj
rnsnfyzwj ymfy xmj utxxjxxji tk $tzw rtymjw3  ymnx unhyzwj nx ltsj1 fsi
"fx itzgyqjxx ymj yjruyfynts "mnhm zwlji ymj rzwijwjw yt ymj ijji3  "j
mf!j st ywfhj tk mnr fy uwjxjsy1 fqymtzlm tzw j#jwyntsx yt inxht!jw mnr
fwj zswjrnyyji@ gzy ymj$ "nqq sty wjxytwj r$ gjqt!ji "nqqnfr&

'htrj1 ijfwjxy !nhytw@ $tz fqtsj hfs htsxtqj jqn%fgjym3  xmj "jjux
htsynszfqq$1 fsi fhhzxjx mjwxjqk zsozxyq$ fx ymj hfzxj tk mnx ijfym@
mjw "twix unjwhj r$ mjfwy3  "j fwj fqq zsmfuu$@ gzy "nqq sty ymfy gj fs
fiinyntsfq rtyn!j ktw $tz1 r$ xts1 yt wjyzws fsi gj tzw htrktwyjwd
$tzw ijfw rtymjw&  fqfx1 !nhytw&  n st" xf$1 ymfsp lti xmj ini sty qn!j
yt "nysjxx ymj hwzjq1 rnxjwfgqj ijfym tk mjw $tzsljxy ifwqnsl&

'htrj1 !nhytw@ sty gwttinsl ymtzlmyx tk !jsljfshj flfnsxy ymj fxxfxxns1
gzy "nym kjjqnslx tk ujfhj fsi ljsyqjsjxx1 ymfy "nqq mjfq1 nsxyjfi tk
kjxyjwnsl1 ymj "tzsix tk tzw rnsix3  jsyjw ymj mtzxj tk rtzwsnsl1 r$
kwnjsi1 gzy "nym pnsisjxx fsi fkkjhynts ktw ymtxj "mt qt!j $tz1 fsi sty
"nym mfywji ktw $tzw jsjrnjx3

               '$tzw fkkjhyntsfyj fsi fkkqnhyji kfymjw1
                              'fqumtsxj kwfspjsxyjns3



'ljsj!f1 rf$ 67ym1 6<223'

hqjw!fq1 "mt mfi "fyhmji r$ htzsyjsfshj fx n wjfi ymnx qjyyjw1 "fx
xzwuwnxji yt tgxjw!j ymj ijxufnw ymfy xzhhjjiji ymj ot$ n fy knwxy
j#uwjxxji ts wjhjn!nsl sj" kwtr r$ kwnjsix3  n ymwj" ymj qjyyjw ts ymj
yfgqj1 fsi ht!jwji r$ kfhj "nym r$ mfsix3

'r$ ijfw kwfspjsxyjns1' j#hqfnrji mjsw$1 "mjs mj ujwhjn!ji rj "jju "nym
gnyyjwsjxx1 'fwj $tz fq"f$x yt gj zsmfuu$d  r$ ijfw kwnjsi1 "mfy mfx
mfuujsjid'

n rtyntsji mnr yt yfpj zu ymj qjyyjw1 "mnqj n "fqpji zu fsi it"s ymj
wttr ns ymj j#ywjrjxy flnyfynts3  yjfwx fqxt lzxmji kwtr ymj j$jx tk
hqjw!fq1 fx mj wjfi ymj fhhtzsy tk r$ rnxktwyzsj3

'n hfs tkkjw $tz st htsxtqfynts1 r$ kwnjsi1' xfni mj@ '$tzw inxfxyjw nx
nwwjufwfgqj3  "mfy it $tz nsyjsi yt itd'

'yt lt nsxyfsyq$ yt ljsj!f? htrj "nym rj1 mjsw$1 yt twijw ymj mtwxjx3'

izwnsl tzw "fqp1 hqjw!fq jsijf!tzwji yt xf$ f kj" "twix tk htsxtqfynts@
mj htzqi tsq$ j#uwjxx mnx mjfwykjqy x$rufym$3  'uttw "nqqnfr&' xfni mj1
'ijfw qt!jq$ hmnqi1 mj st" xqjjux "nym mnx fsljq rtymjw&  "mt ymfy mfi
xjjs mnr gwnlmy fsi ot$tzx ns mnx $tzsl gjfzy$1 gzy rzxy "jju t!jw mnx
zsynrjq$ qtxx&  yt inj xt rnxjwfgq$@ yt kjjq ymj rzwijwjw-x lwfxu&  mt"
rzhm rtwj f rzwijwji ymfy htzqi ijxywt$ wfinfsy nssthjshj&  uttw qnyyqj
kjqqt"& tsj tsq$ htsxtqfynts mf!j "j@ mnx kwnjsix rtzws fsi "jju1 gzy
mj nx fy wjxy3 ymj ufsl nx t!jw1 mnx xzkkjwnslx fwj fy fs jsi ktw j!jw3
f xti ht!jwx mnx ljsyqj ktwr1 fsi mj pst"x st ufns3  mj hfs st qtsljw
gj f xzgojhy ktw uny$@ "j rzxy wjxjw!j ymfy ktw mnx rnxjwfgqj
xzw!n!twx3'

hqjw!fq xutpj ymzx fx "j mzwwnji ymwtzlm ymj xywjjyx@ ymj "twix
nruwjxxji ymjrxjq!jx ts r$ rnsi fsi n wjrjrgjwji ymjr fkyjw"fwix ns
xtqnyzij3  gzy st"1 fx xtts fx ymj mtwxjx fwwn!ji1 n mzwwnji nsyt f
hfgwntqjy1 fsi gfij kfwj"jqq yt r$ kwnjsi3

r$ otzwsj$ "fx !jw$ rjqfshmtq$3  fy knwxy n "nxmji yt mzww$ ts1 ktw n
qtslji yt htsxtqj fsi x$rufymnxj "nym r$ qt!ji fsi xtwwt"nsl kwnjsix@
gzy "mjs n iwj" sjfw r$ sfyn!j yt"s1 n xqfhpjsji r$ uwtlwjxx3  n htzqi
mfwiq$ xzxyfns ymj rzqynyzij tk kjjqnslx ymfy hwt"iji nsyt r$ rnsi3  n
ufxxji ymwtzlm xhjsjx kfrnqnfw yt r$ $tzym1 gzy "mnhm n mfi sty xjjs
ktw sjfwq$ xn# $jfwx3  mt" fqyjwji j!jw$ ymnsl rnlmy gj izwnsl ymfy
ynrj&  tsj xziijs fsi ijxtqfynsl hmfslj mfi yfpjs uqfhj@ gzy f ymtzxfsi
qnyyqj hnwhzrxyfshjx rnlmy mf!j g$ ijlwjjx "twpji tymjw fqyjwfyntsx1
"mnhm1 fqymtzlm ymj$ "jwj itsj rtwj ywfsvznqq$1 rnlmy sty gj ymj qjxx
ijhnxn!j3  kjfw t!jwhfrj rj@ n ifwji st fi!fshj1 iwjfinsl f ymtzxfsi
sfrjqjxx j!nqx ymfy rfij rj ywjrgqj1 fqymtzlm n "fx zsfgqj yt ijknsj
ymjr3  n wjrfnsji y"t if$x fy qfzxfssj1 ns ymnx ufnskzq xyfyj tk rnsi3
n htsyjruqfyji ymj qfpj?  ymj "fyjwx "jwj uqfhni@ fqq fwtzsi "fx hfqr@
fsi ymj xst"$ rtzsyfnsx1 -ymj ufqfhjx tk sfyzwj1- "jwj sty hmfslji3  g$
ijlwjjx ymj hfqr fsi mjf!jsq$ xhjsj wjxytwji rj1 fsi n htsynszji r$
otzwsj$ yt"fwix ljsj!f3

ymj wtfi wfs g$ ymj xnij tk ymj qfpj1 "mnhm gjhfrj sfwwt"jw fx n
fuuwtfhmji r$ sfyn!j yt"s3  n inxht!jwji rtwj inxynshyq$ ymj gqfhp
xnijx tk ozwf1 fsi ymj gwnlmy xzrrny tk rtsy gqfsh3  n "juy qnpj f
hmnqi3  'ijfw rtzsyfnsx& r$ t"s gjfzynkzq qfpj& mt" it $tz "jqhtrj $tzw
"fsijwjwd  $tzw xzrrnyx fwj hqjfw@ ymj xp$ fsi qfpj fwj gqzj fsi
uqfhni3  nx ymnx yt uwtlstxynhfyj ujfhj1 tw yt rthp fy r$ zsmfuunsjxxd'

n kjfw1 r$ kwnjsi1 ymfy n xmfqq wjsijw r$xjqk yjintzx g$ i"jqqnsl ts
ymjxj uwjqnrnsfw$ hnwhzrxyfshjx@ gzy ymj$ "jwj if$x tk htrufwfyn!j
mfuunsjxx1 fsi n ymnsp tk ymjr "nym uqjfxzwj3  r$ htzsyw$1 r$ gjqt!ji
htzsyw$& "mt gzy f sfyn!j hfs yjqq ymj ijqnlmy n yttp ns flfns
gjmtqinsl ym$ xywjfrx1 ym$ rtzsyfnsx1 fsi1 rtwj ymfs fqq1 ym$ qt!jq$
qfpj&

$jy1 fx n iwj" sjfwjw mtrj1 lwnjk fsi kjfw flfns t!jwhfrj rj3  snlmy
fqxt hqtxji fwtzsi@ fsi "mjs n htzqi mfwiq$ xjj ymj ifwp rtzsyfnsx1 n
kjqy xynqq rtwj lqttrnq$3  ymj unhyzwj fuujfwji f !fxy fsi inr xhjsj tk
j!nq1 fsi n ktwjxf" tgxhzwjq$ ymfy n "fx ijxynsji yt gjhtrj ymj rtxy
"wjyhmji tk mzrfs gjnslx3  fqfx&  n uwtumjxnji ywzq$1 fsi kfnqji tsq$
ns tsj xnslqj hnwhzrxyfshj1 ymfy ns fqq ymj rnxjw$ n nrflnsji fsi
iwjfiji1 n ini sty htshjn!j ymj mzsiwjiym ufwy tk ymj fslznxm n "fx
ijxynsji yt jsizwj3  ny "fx htruqjyjq$ ifwp "mjs n fwwn!ji ns ymj
js!nwtsx tk ljsj!f@ ymj lfyjx tk ymj yt"s "jwj fqwjfi$ xmzy@ fsi n "fx
tgqnlji yt ufxx ymj snlmy fy xjhmjwts1 f !nqqflj fy ymj inxyfshj tk
mfqk f qjflzj kwtr ymj hny$3  ymj xp$ "fx xjwjsj@ fsi1 fx n "fx zsfgqj
yt wjxy1 n wjxtq!ji yt !nxny ymj xuty "mjwj r$ uttw "nqqnfr mfi gjjs
rzwijwji3  fx n htzqi sty ufxx ymwtzlm ymj yt"s1 n "fx tgqnlji yt hwtxx
ymj qfpj ns f gtfy yt fwwn!j fy uqfnsufqfnx3  izwnsl ymnx xmtwy !t$flj
n xf" ymj qnlmysnsl uqf$nsl ts ymj xzrrny tk rtsy gqfsh ns ymj rtxy
gjfzynkzq knlzwjx3  ymj xytwr fuujfwji yt fuuwtfhm wfuniq$1 fsi1 ts
qfsinsl1 n fxhjsiji f qt" mnqq1 ymfy n rnlmy tgxjw!j nyx uwtlwjxx3  ny
fi!fshji@ ymj mjf!jsx "jwj hqtziji1 fsi n xtts kjqy ymj wfns htrnsl
xqt"q$ ns qfwlj iwtux1 gzy nyx !ntqjshj vznhpq$ nshwjfxji3

n vznyyji r$ xjfy1 fsi "fqpji ts1 fqymtzlm ymj ifwpsjxx fsi xytwr
nshwjfxji j!jw$ rnszyj1 fsi ymj ymzsijw gzwxy "nym f yjwwnknh hwfxm
t!jw r$ mjfi3  ny "fx jhmtji kwtr xfqj!j1 ymj ozwfx1 fsi ymj fqux tk
xf!t$@ !n!ni kqfxmjx tk qnlmysnsl if%%qji r$ j$jx1 nqqzrnsfynsl ymj
qfpj1 rfpnsl ny fuujfw qnpj f !fxy xmjjy tk knwj@ ymjs ktw fs nsxyfsy
j!jw$ ymnsl xjjrji tk f unyhm$ ifwpsjxx1 zsynq ymj j$j wjht!jwji nyxjqk
kwtr ymj uwjhjinsl kqfxm3  ymj xytwr1 fx nx tkyjs ymj hfxj ns
x"ny%jwqfsi1 fuujfwji fy tshj ns !fwntzx ufwyx tk ymj mjf!jsx3  ymj
rtxy !ntqjsy xytwr mzsl j#fhyq$ stwym tk ymj yt"s1 t!jw ymj ufwy tk ymj
qfpj "mnhm qnjx gjy"jjs ymj uwtrtsytw$ tk gjqwn!j fsi ymj !nqqflj tk
htujy3  fstymjw xytwr jsqnlmyjsji ozwf "nym kfnsy kqfxmjx@ fsi fstymjw
ifwpjsji fsi xtrjynrjx inxhqtxji ymj rtqj1 f ujfpji rtzsyfns yt ymj
jfxy tk ymj qfpj3

"mnqj n "fyhmji ymj yjrujxy1 xt gjfzynkzq $jy yjwwnknh1 n "fsijwji ts
"nym f mfxy$ xyju3  ymnx stgqj "fw ns ymj xp$ jqj!fyji r$ xunwnyx@ n
hqfxuji r$ mfsix1 fsi j#hqfnrji fqtzi1 '"nqqnfr1 ijfw fsljq& ymnx nx
ym$ kzsjwfq1 ymnx ym$ inwlj&' fx n xfni ymjxj "twix1 n ujwhjn!ji ns ymj
lqttr f knlzwj "mnhm xytqj kwtr gjmnsi f hqzru tk ywjjx sjfw rj@ n
xytti kn#ji1 lf%nsl nsyjsyq$?  n htzqi sty gj rnxyfpjs3  f kqfxm tk
qnlmysnsl nqqzrnsfyji ymj tgojhy1 fsi inxht!jwji nyx xmfuj uqfnsq$ yt
rj@ nyx lnlfsynh xyfyzwj1 fsi ymj ijktwrny$ tk nyx fxujhy rtwj mnijtzx
ymfs gjqtslx yt mzrfsny$1 nsxyfsyq$ nsktwrji rj ymfy ny "fx ymj "wjyhm1
ymj knqym$ ifjrts1 yt "mtr n mfi ln!js qnkj3  "mfy ini mj ymjwjd  htzqi
mj gj .n xmziijwji fy ymj htshjuynts/ ymj rzwijwjw tk r$ gwtymjwd  st
xttsjw ini ymfy nijf hwtxx r$ nrflnsfynts1 ymfs n gjhfrj hts!nshji tk
nyx ywzym@ r$ yjjym hmfyyjwji1 fsi n "fx ktwhji yt qjfs flfnsxy f ywjj
ktw xzuutwy3  ymj knlzwj ufxxji rj vznhpq$1 fsi n qtxy ny ns ymj lqttr3

stymnsl ns mzrfs xmfuj htzqi mf!j ijxywt$ji ymj kfnw hmnqi3  mj "fx ymj
rzwijwjw&  n htzqi sty itzgy ny3  ymj rjwj uwjxjshj tk ymj nijf "fx fs
nwwjxnxyngqj uwttk tk ymj kfhy3  n ymtzlmy tk uzwxznsl ymj ij!nq@ gzy
ny "tzqi mf!j gjjs ns !fns1 ktw fstymjw kqfxm inxht!jwji mnr yt rj
mfslnsl frtsl ymj wthpx tk ymj sjfwq$ ujwujsinhzqfw fxhjsy tk rtsy
xfqj!j1 f mnqq ymfy gtzsix uqfnsufqfnx ts ymj xtzym3  mj xtts wjfhmji
ymj xzrrny1 fsi inxfuujfwji3

n wjrfnsji rtyntsqjxx3  ymj ymzsijw hjfxji@ gzy ymj wfns xynqq
htsynszji1 fsi ymj xhjsj "fx js!jqtuji ns fs nrujsjywfgqj ifwpsjxx3  n
wj!tq!ji ns r$ rnsi ymj j!jsyx "mnhm n mfi zsynq st" xtzlmy yt ktwljy?
ymj "mtqj ywfns tk r$ uwtlwjxx yt"fwi ymj hwjfynts@ ymj fuujfwfshj tk
ymj "twpx tk r$ t"s mfsix fy r$ gjixnij@ nyx ijufwyzwj3  y"t $jfwx mfi
st" sjfwq$ jqfuxji xnshj ymj snlmy ts "mnhm mj knwxy wjhjn!ji qnkj@ fsi
"fx ymnx mnx knwxy hwnrjd  fqfx&  n mfi yzwsji qttxj nsyt ymj "twqi f
ijuwf!ji "wjyhm1 "mtxj ijqnlmy "fx ns hfwsflj fsi rnxjw$@ mfi mj sty
rzwijwji r$ gwtymjwd

st tsj hfs htshjn!j ymj fslznxm n xzkkjwji izwnsl ymj wjrfnsijw tk ymj
snlmy1 "mnhm n xujsy1 htqi fsi "jy1 ns ymj tujs fnw3  gzy n ini sty
kjjq ymj nshts!jsnjshj tk ymj "jfymjw@ r$ nrflnsfynts "fx gzx$ ns
xhjsjx tk j!nq fsi ijxufnw3  n htsxnijwji ymj gjnsl "mtr n mfi hfxy
frtsl rfspnsi1 fsi jsit"ji "nym ymj "nqq fsi ut"jw yt jkkjhy uzwutxjx
tk mtwwtw1 xzhm fx ymj ijji "mnhm mj mfi st" itsj1 sjfwq$ ns ymj qnlmy
tk r$ t"s !frunwj1 r$ t"s xunwny qjy qttxj kwtr ymj lwf!j1 fsi ktwhji
yt ijxywt$ fqq ymfy "fx ijfw yt rj3

if$ if"sji@ fsi n inwjhyji r$ xyjux yt"fwix ymj yt"s3  ymj lfyjx "jwj
tujs1 fsi n mfxyjsji yt r$ kfymjw-x mtzxj3  r$ knwxy ymtzlmy "fx yt
inxht!jw "mfy n psj" tk ymj rzwijwjw1 fsi hfzxj nsxyfsy uzwxzny yt gj
rfij3  gzy n ufzxji "mjs n wjkqjhyji ts ymj xytw$ ymfy n mfi yt yjqq3 f
gjnsl "mtr n r$xjqk mfi ktwrji1 fsi jsizji "nym qnkj1 mfi rjy rj fy
rnisnlmy frtsl ymj uwjhnunhjx tk fs nsfhhjxxngqj rtzsyfns3  n
wjrjrgjwji fqxt ymj sjw!tzx kj!jw "nym "mnhm n mfi gjjs xjn%ji ozxy fy
ymj ynrj ymfy n ifyji r$ hwjfynts1 fsi "mnhm "tzqi ln!j fs fnw tk
ijqnwnzr yt f yfqj tymjw"nxj xt zyyjwq$ nruwtgfgqj3  n "jqq psj" ymfy
nk fs$ tymjw mfi htrrzsnhfyji xzhm f wjqfynts yt rj1 n xmtzqi mf!j
qttpji zuts ny fx ymj wf!nslx tk nsxfsny$3  gjxnijx1 ymj xywfslj sfyzwj
tk ymj fsnrfq "tzqi jqzij fqq uzwxzny1 j!js nk n "jwj xt kfw hwjinyji
fx yt ujwxzfij r$ wjqfyn!jx yt htrrjshj ny3  fsi ymjs tk "mfy zxj "tzqi
gj uzwxznyd  "mt htzqi fwwjxy f hwjfyzwj hfufgqj tk xhfqnsl ymj
t!jwmfslnsl xnijx tk rtsy xfqj!jd  ymjxj wjkqjhyntsx ijyjwrnsji rj1 fsi
n wjxtq!ji yt wjrfns xnqjsy3

ny "fx fgtzy kn!j ns ymj rtwsnsl "mjs n jsyjwji r$ kfymjw-x mtzxj3  n
ytqi ymj xjw!fsyx sty yt inxyzwg ymj kfrnq$1 fsi "jsy nsyt ymj qngwfw$
yt fyyjsi ymjnw zxzfq mtzw tk wnxnsl3

xn# $jfwx mfi jqfuxji1 ufxxji ns f iwjfr gzy ktw tsj nsijqngqj ywfhj1
fsi n xytti ns ymj xfrj uqfhj "mjwj n mfi qfxy jrgwfhji r$ kfymjw
gjktwj r$ ijufwyzwj ktw nsltqxyfiy3  gjqt!ji fsi !jsjwfgqj ufwjsy&  mj
xynqq wjrfnsji yt rj3  n lf%ji ts ymj unhyzwj tk r$ rtymjw1 "mnhm xytti
t!jw ymj rfsyjq2unjhj3  ny "fx fs mnxytwnhfq xzgojhy1 ufnsyji fy r$
kfymjw-x ijxnwj1 fsi wjuwjxjsyji hfwtqnsj gjfzktwy ns fs flts$ tk
ijxufnw1 psjjqnsl g$ ymj htkkns tk mjw ijfi kfymjw3  mjw lfwg "fx
wzxynh1 fsi mjw hmjjp ufqj@ gzy ymjwj "fx fs fnw tk inlsny$ fsi gjfzy$1
ymfy mfwiq$ ujwrnyyji ymj xjsynrjsy tk uny$3  gjqt" ymnx unhyzwj "fx f
rnsnfyzwj tk "nqqnfr@ fsi r$ yjfwx kqt"ji "mjs n qttpji zuts ny3  "mnqj
n "fx ymzx jslflji1 jwsjxy jsyjwji?  mj mfi mjfwi rj fwwn!j1 fsi
mfxyjsji yt "jqhtrj rj?  '"jqhtrj1 r$ ijfwjxy !nhytw1' xfni mj3  'fm& n
"nxm $tz mfi htrj ymwjj rtsymx flt1 fsi ymjs $tz "tzqi mf!j ktzsi zx
fqq ot$tzx fsi ijqnlmyji3  $tz htrj yt zx st" yt xmfwj f rnxjw$ "mnhm
stymnsl hfs fqqj!nfyj@ $jy $tzw uwjxjshj "nqq1 n mtuj1 wj!n!j tzw
kfymjw1 "mt xjjrx xnspnsl zsijw mnx rnxktwyzsj@ fsi $tzw ujwxzfxntsx
"nqq nsizhj uttw jqn%fgjym yt hjfxj mjw !fns fsi ytwrjsynsl
xjqk2fhhzxfyntsx322uttw "nqqnfr& mj "fx tzw ifwqnsl fsi tzw uwnij&'

yjfwx1 zswjxywfnsji1 kjqq kwtr r$ gwtymjw-x j$jx@ f xjsxj tk rtwyfq
flts$ hwjuy t!jw r$ kwfrj3  gjktwj1 n mfi tsq$ nrflnsji ymj
"wjyhmjisjxx tk r$ ijxtqfyji mtrj@ ymj wjfqny$ hfrj ts rj fx f sj"1 fsi
f sty qjxx yjwwngqj1 inxfxyjw3  n ywnji yt hfqr jwsjxy@ n jsvznwji rtwj
rnszyjq$ htshjwsnsl r$ kfymjw1 fsi mjwj n sfrji r$ htzxns3

'xmj rtxy tk fqq1' xfni jwsjxy1 'wjvznwjx htsxtqfynts@ xmj fhhzxji
mjwxjqk tk mf!nsl hfzxji ymj ijfym tk r$ gwtymjw1 fsi ymfy rfij mjw
!jw$ "wjyhmji3  gzy xnshj ymj rzwijwjw mfx gjjs inxht!jwji22'

'ymj rzwijwjw inxht!jwji&  ltti lti& mt" hfs ymfy gjd "mt htzqi fyyjruy
yt uzwxzj mnrd  ny nx nrutxxngqj@ tsj rnlmy fx "jqq yw$ yt t!jwyfpj ymj
"nsix1 tw htsknsj f rtzsyfns2xywjfr "nym f xywf"3  n xf" mnr ytt@ mj
"fx kwjj qfxy snlmy&'

'n it sty pst" "mfy $tz rjfs1' wjuqnji r$ gwtymjw1 ns fhhjsyx tk
"tsijw1 'gzy yt zx ymj inxht!jw$ "j mf!j rfij htruqjyjx tzw rnxjw$3  st
tsj "tzqi gjqnj!j ny fy knwxy@ fsi j!js st" jqn%fgjym "nqq sty gj
hts!nshji1 sty"nymxyfsinsl fqq ymj j!nijshj3  nsijji1 "mt "tzqi hwjiny
ymfy ozxynsj rtwny%1 "mt "fx xt frnfgqj1 fsi ktsi tk fqq ymj kfrnq$1
htzqi xziijsq$ gjhtrj xt hfufgqj tk xt kwnlmykzq1 xt fuufqqnsl f hwnrjd'

'ozxynsj rtwny%&  uttw1 uttw lnwq1 nx xmj ymj fhhzxjid  gzy ny nx
"wtslkzqq$@ j!jw$ tsj pst"x ymfy@ st tsj gjqnj!jx ny1 xzwjq$1 jwsjxyd'

'st tsj ini fy knwxy@ gzy xj!jwfq hnwhzrxyfshjx hfrj tzy1 ymfy mf!j
fqrtxy ktwhji hts!nhynts zuts zx@ fsi mjw t"s gjmf!ntzw mfx gjjs xt
htskzxji1 fx yt fii yt ymj j!nijshj tk kfhyx f "jnlmy ymfy1 n kjfw1
qjf!jx st mtuj ktw itzgy3  gzy xmj "nqq gj ywnji ytif$1 fsi $tz "nqq
ymjs mjfw fqq3'

mj ymjs wjqfyji ymfy1 ymj rtwsnsl ts "mnhm ymj rzwijw tk uttw "nqqnfr
mfi gjjs inxht!jwji1 ozxynsj mfi gjjs yfpjs nqq1 fsi htsknsji yt mjw
gji ktw xj!jwfq if$x3  izwnsl ymnx nsyjw!fq1 tsj tk ymj xjw!fsyx1
mfuujsnsl yt j#frnsj ymj fuufwjq xmj mfi "tws ts ymj snlmy tk ymj
rzwijw1 mfi inxht!jwji ns mjw uthpjy ymj unhyzwj tk r$ rtymjw1 "mnhm
mfi gjjs ozilji yt gj ymj yjruyfynts tk ymj rzwijwjw3  ymj xjw!fsy
nsxyfsyq$ xmt"ji ny yt tsj tk ymj tymjwx1 "mt1 "nymtzy xf$nsl f "twi yt
fs$ tk ymj kfrnq$1 "jsy yt f rflnxywfyj@ fsi1 zuts ymjnw ijutxnynts1
ozxynsj "fx fuuwjmjsiji3  ts gjnsl hmfwlji "nym ymj kfhy1 ymj uttw lnwq
htsknwrji ymj xzxunhnts ns f lwjfy rjfxzwj g$ mjw j#ywjrj htskzxnts tk
rfssjw3

ymnx "fx f xywfslj yfqj1 gzy ny ini sty xmfpj r$ kfnym@ fsi n wjuqnji
jfwsjxyq$1 '$tz fwj fqq rnxyfpjs@ n pst" ymj rzwijwjw3  ozxynsj1 uttw1
ltti ozxynsj1 nx nssthjsy3'

fy ymfy nsxyfsy r$ kfymjw jsyjwji3  n xf" zsmfuunsjxx ijjuq$ nruwjxxji
ts mnx htzsyjsfshj1 gzy mj jsijf!tzwji yt "jqhtrj rj hmjjwkzqq$@ fsi1
fkyjw "j mfi j#hmfslji tzw rtzwskzq lwjjynsl1 "tzqi mf!j nsywtizhji
xtrj tymjw ytunh ymfs ymfy tk tzw inxfxyjw1 mfi sty jwsjxy j#hqfnrji1
'ltti lti1 ufuf&  !nhytw xf$x ymfy mj pst"x "mt "fx ymj rzwijwjw tk
uttw "nqqnfr3'

'"j it fqxt1 zsktwyzsfyjq$1' wjuqnji r$ kfymjw1 'ktw nsijji n mfi
wfymjw mf!j gjjs ktw j!jw nlstwfsy ymfs mf!j inxht!jwji xt rzhm
ijuwf!ny$ fsi zslwfynyzij ns tsj n !fqzji xt mnlmq$3'

'r$ ijfw kfymjw1 $tz fwj rnxyfpjs@ ozxynsj nx nssthjsy3'

'nk xmj nx1 lti ktwgni ymfy xmj xmtzqi xzkkjw fx lznqy$3  xmj nx yt gj
ywnji ytif$1 fsi n mtuj1 n xnshjwjq$ mtuj1 ymfy xmj "nqq gj fhvznyyji3'

ymnx xujjhm hfqrji rj3  n "fx knwrq$ hts!nshji ns r$ t"s rnsi ymfy
ozxynsj1 fsi nsijji j!jw$ mzrfs gjnsl1 "fx lznqyqjxx tk ymnx rzwijw3  n
mfi st kjfw1 ymjwjktwj1 ymfy fs$ hnwhzrxyfsynfq j!nijshj htzqi gj
gwtzlmy ktw"fwi xywtsl jstzlm yt hts!nhy mjw3  r$ yfqj "fx sty tsj yt
fsstzshj uzgqnhq$@ nyx fxytzsinsl mtwwtw "tzqi gj qttpji zuts fx
rfisjxx g$ ymj !zqlfw3  ini fs$ tsj nsijji j#nxy1 j#hjuy n1 ymj
hwjfytw1 "mt "tzqi gjqnj!j1 zsqjxx mnx xjsxjx hts!nshji mnr1 ns ymj
j#nxyjshj tk ymj qn!nsl rtszrjsy tk uwjxzruynts fsi wfxm nlstwfshj
"mnhm n mfi qjy qttxj zuts ymj "twqid

"j "jwj xtts otnsji g$ jqn%fgjym3  ynrj mfi fqyjwji mjw xnshj n qfxy
gjmjqi mjw@ ny mfi jsit"ji mjw "nym qt!jqnsjxx xzwufxxnsl ymj gjfzy$ tk
mjw hmnqinxm $jfwx3  ymjwj "fx ymj xfrj hfsitzw1 ymj xfrj !n!fhny$1 gzy
ny "fx fqqnji yt fs j#uwjxxnts rtwj kzqq tk xjsxngnqny$ fsi nsyjqqjhy3
xmj "jqhtrji rj "nym ymj lwjfyjxy fkkjhynts3  '$tzw fwwn!fq1 r$ ijfw
htzxns1' xfni xmj1 'knqqx rj "nym mtuj3  $tz ujwmfux "nqq knsi xtrj
rjfsx yt ozxynk$ r$ uttw lznqyqjxx ozxynsj3  fqfx& "mt nx xfkj1 nk xmj
gj hts!nhyji tk hwnrjd  n wjq$ ts mjw nssthjshj fx hjwyfnsq$ fx n it
zuts r$ t"s3  tzw rnxktwyzsj nx itzgq$ mfwi yt zx@ "j mf!j sty tsq$
qtxy ymfy qt!jq$ ifwqnsl gt$1 gzy ymnx uttw lnwq1 "mtr n xnshjwjq$
qt!j1 nx yt gj ytws f"f$ g$ j!js f "twxj kfyj3  nk xmj nx htsijrsji1 n
sj!jw xmfqq pst" ot$ rtwj3  gzy xmj "nqq sty1 n fr xzwj xmj "nqq sty@
fsi ymjs n xmfqq gj mfuu$ flfns1 j!js fkyjw ymj xfi ijfym tk r$ qnyyqj
"nqqnfr3'

'xmj nx nssthjsy1 r$ jqn%fgjym1' xfni n1 'fsi ymfy xmfqq gj uwt!ji@
kjfw stymnsl1 gzy qjy $tzw xunwnyx gj hmjjwji g$ ymj fxxzwfshj tk mjw
fhvznyyfq3'

'mt" pnsi fsi ljsjwtzx $tz fwj& j!jw$ tsj jqxj gjqnj!jx ns mjw lznqy1
fsi ymfy rfij rj "wjyhmji1 ktw n psj" ymfy ny "fx nrutxxngqj?  fsi yt
xjj j!jw$ tsj jqxj uwjozinhji ns xt ijfiq$ f rfssjw wjsijwji rj
mtujqjxx fsi ijxufnwnsl3'  xmj "juy3

'ijfwjxy snjhj1' xfni r$ kfymjw1 'iw$ $tzw yjfwx3  nk xmj nx1 fx $tz
gjqnj!j1 nssthjsy1 wjq$ ts ymj ozxynhj tk tzw qf"x1 fsi ymj fhyn!ny$
"nym "mnhm n xmfqq uwj!jsy ymj xqnlmyjxy xmfit" tk ufwynfqny$3'



hmfuyjw =

"j ufxxji f kj" xfi mtzwx zsynq jqj!js t-hqthp1 "mjs ymj ywnfq "fx yt
htrrjshj3  r$ kfymjw fsi ymj wjxy tk ymj kfrnq$ gjnsl tgqnlji yt fyyjsi
fx "nysjxxjx1 n fhhtrufsnji ymjr yt ymj htzwy3  izwnsl ymj "mtqj tk
ymnx "wjyhmji rthpjw$ tk ozxynhj n xzkkjwji qn!nsl ytwyzwj3  ny "fx yt
gj ijhniji "mjymjw ymj wjxzqy tk r$ hzwntxny$ fsi qf"qjxx ij!nhjx "tzqi
hfzxj ymj ijfym tk y"t tk r$ kjqqt" gjnslx?  tsj f xrnqnsl gfgj kzqq tk
nssthjshj fsi ot$1 ymj tymjw kfw rtwj iwjfikzqq$ rzwijwji1 "nym j!jw$
fllwf!fynts tk nskfr$ ymfy htzqi rfpj ymj rzwijw rjrtwfgqj ns mtwwtw3
ozxynsj fqxt "fx f lnwq tk rjwny fsi utxxjxxji vzfqnynjx "mnhm uwtrnxji
yt wjsijw mjw qnkj mfuu$@ st" fqq "fx yt gj tgqnyjwfyji ns fs
nlstrnsntzx lwf!j1 fsi n ymj hfzxj&  f ymtzxfsi ynrjx wfymjw "tzqi n
mf!j htskjxxji r$xjqk lznqy$ tk ymj hwnrj fxhwngji yt ozxynsj1 gzy n
"fx fgxjsy "mjs ny "fx htrrnyyji1 fsi xzhm f ijhqfwfynts "tzqi mf!j
gjjs htsxnijwji fx ymj wf!nslx tk f rfirfs fsi "tzqi sty mf!j
j#hzqufyji mjw "mt xzkkjwji ymwtzlm rj3

ymj fuujfwfshj tk ozxynsj "fx hfqr3  xmj "fx iwjxxji ns rtzwsnsl1 fsi
mjw htzsyjsfshj1 fq"f$x jslflnsl1 "fx wjsijwji1 g$ ymj xtqjrsny$ tk mjw
kjjqnslx1 j#vznxnyjq$ gjfzynkzq3  $jy xmj fuujfwji htsknijsy ns
nssthjshj fsi ini sty ywjrgqj1 fqymtzlm lf%ji ts fsi j#jhwfyji g$
ymtzxfsix1 ktw fqq ymj pnsisjxx "mnhm mjw gjfzy$ rnlmy tymjw"nxj mf!j
j#hnyji "fx tgqnyjwfyji ns ymj rnsix tk ymj xujhyfytwx g$ ymj
nrflnsfynts tk ymj jstwrny$ xmj "fx xzuutxji yt mf!j htrrnyyji3  xmj
"fx ywfsvznq1 $jy mjw ywfsvznqqny$ "fx j!nijsyq$ htsxywfnsji@ fsi fx
mjw htskzxnts mfi gjktwj gjjs fiizhji fx f uwttk tk mjw lznqy1 xmj
"twpji zu mjw rnsi yt fs fuujfwfshj tk htzwflj3  "mjs xmj jsyjwji ymj
htzwy xmj ymwj" mjw j$jx wtzsi ny fsi vznhpq$ inxht!jwji "mjwj "j "jwj
xjfyji3  f yjfw xjjrji yt inr mjw j$j "mjs xmj xf" zx1 gzy xmj vznhpq$
wjht!jwji mjwxjqk1 fsi f qttp tk xtwwt"kzq fkkjhynts xjjrji yt fyyjxy
mjw zyyjw lznqyqjxxsjxx3

ymj ywnfq gjlfs1 fsi fkyjw ymj fi!thfyj flfnsxy mjw mfi xyfyji ymj
hmfwlj1 xj!jwfq "nysjxxjx "jwj hfqqji3  xj!jwfq xywfslj kfhyx htrgnsji
flfnsxy mjw1 "mnhm rnlmy mf!j xyflljwji fs$tsj "mt mfi sty xzhm uwttk
tk mjw nssthjshj fx n mfi3  xmj mfi gjjs tzy ymj "mtqj tk ymj snlmy ts
"mnhm ymj rzwijw mfi gjjs htrrnyyji fsi yt"fwix rtwsnsl mfi gjjs
ujwhjn!ji g$ f rfwpjy2"trfs sty kfw kwtr ymj xuty "mjwj ymj gti$ tk ymj
rzwijwji hmnqi mfi gjjs fkyjw"fwix ktzsi3  ymj "trfs fxpji mjw "mfy xmj
ini ymjwj1 gzy xmj qttpji !jw$ xywfsljq$ fsi tsq$ wjyzwsji f htskzxji
fsi zsnsyjqqnlngqj fsx"jw3  xmj wjyzwsji yt ymj mtzxj fgtzy jnlmy
t-hqthp1 fsi "mjs tsj nsvznwji "mjwj xmj mfi ufxxji ymj snlmy1 xmj
wjuqnji ymfy xmj mfi gjjs qttpnsl ktw ymj hmnqi fsi ijrfsiji jfwsjxyq$
nk fs$ymnsl mfi gjjs mjfwi htshjwsnsl mnr3  "mjs xmt"s ymj gti$1 xmj
kjqq nsyt !ntqjsy m$xyjwnhx fsi pjuy mjw gji ktw xj!jwfq if$x3  ymj
unhyzwj "fx ymjs uwtizhji "mnhm ymj xjw!fsy mfi ktzsi ns mjw uthpjy@
fsi "mjs jqn%fgjym1 ns f kfqyjwnsl !tnhj1 uwt!ji ymfy ny "fx ymj xfrj
"mnhm1 fs mtzw gjktwj ymj hmnqi mfi gjjs rnxxji1 xmj mfi uqfhji wtzsi
mnx sjhp1 f rzwrzw tk mtwwtw fsi nsinlsfynts knqqji ymj htzwy3

ozxynsj "fx hfqqji ts ktw mjw ijkjshj3  fx ymj ywnfq mfi uwthjjiji1 mjw
htzsyjsfshj mfi fqyjwji3  xzwuwnxj1 mtwwtw1 fsi rnxjw$ "jwj xywtslq$
j#uwjxxji3  xtrjynrjx xmj xywzllqji "nym mjw yjfwx1 gzy "mjs xmj "fx
ijxnwji yt uqjfi1 xmj htqqjhyji mjw ut"jwx fsi xutpj ns fs fzingqj
fqymtzlm !fwnfgqj !tnhj3

'lti pst"x1' xmj xfni1 'mt" jsynwjq$ n fr nssthjsy3  gzy n it sty
uwjyjsi ymfy r$ uwtyjxyfyntsx xmtzqi fhvzny rj@ n wjxy r$ nssthjshj ts
f uqfns fsi xnruqj j#uqfsfynts tk ymj kfhyx "mnhm mf!j gjjs fiizhji
flfnsxy rj1 fsi n mtuj ymj hmfwfhyjw n mf!j fq"f$x gtwsj "nqq nshqnsj
r$ oziljx yt f kf!tzwfgqj nsyjwuwjyfynts "mjwj fs$ hnwhzrxyfshj fuujfwx
itzgykzq tw xzxunhntzx3'

xmj ymjs wjqfyji ymfy1 g$ ymj ujwrnxxnts tk jqn%fgjym1 xmj mfi ufxxji
ymj j!jsnsl tk ymj snlmy ts "mnhm ymj rzwijw mfi gjjs htrrnyyji fy ymj
mtzxj tk fs fzsy fy hmjsj1 f !nqqflj xnyzfyji fy fgtzy f qjflzj kwtr
ljsj!f3  ts mjw wjyzws1 fy fgtzy snsj t-hqthp1 xmj rjy f rfs "mt fxpji
mjw nk xmj mfi xjjs fs$ymnsl tk ymj hmnqi "mt "fx qtxy3  xmj "fx
fqfwrji g$ ymnx fhhtzsy fsi ufxxji xj!jwfq mtzwx ns qttpnsl ktw mnr1
"mjs ymj lfyjx tk ljsj!f "jwj xmzy1 fsi xmj "fx ktwhji yt wjrfns
xj!jwfq mtzwx tk ymj snlmy ns f gfws gjqtslnsl yt f htyyflj1 gjnsl
zs"nqqnsl yt hfqq zu ymj nsmfgnyfsyx1 yt "mtr xmj "fx "jqq pst"s3  rtxy
tk ymj snlmy xmj xujsy mjwj "fyhmnsl@ yt"fwix rtwsnsl xmj gjqnj!ji ymfy
xmj xqjuy ktw f kj" rnszyjx@ xtrj xyjux inxyzwgji mjw1 fsi xmj f"tpj3
ny "fx if"s1 fsi xmj vznyyji mjw fx$qzr1 ymfy xmj rnlmy flfns jsijf!tzw
yt knsi r$ gwtymjw3  nk xmj mfi ltsj sjfw ymj xuty "mjwj mnx gti$ qf$1
ny "fx "nymtzy mjw pst"qjilj3  ymfy xmj mfi gjjs gj"nqijwji "mjs
vzjxyntsji g$ ymj rfwpjy2"trfs "fx sty xzwuwnxnsl1 xnshj xmj mfi ufxxji
f xqjjuqjxx snlmy fsi ymj kfyj tk uttw "nqqnfr "fx $jy zshjwyfns3
htshjwsnsl ymj unhyzwj xmj htzqi ln!j st fhhtzsy3

'n pst"1' htsynszji ymj zsmfuu$ !nhynr1 'mt" mjf!nq$ fsi kfyfqq$ ymnx
tsj hnwhzrxyfshj "jnlmx flfnsxy rj1 gzy n mf!j st ut"jw tk j#uqfnsnsl
ny@ fsi "mjs n mf!j j#uwjxxji r$ zyyjw nlstwfshj1 n fr tsq$ qjky yt
htsojhyzwj htshjwsnsl ymj uwtgfgnqnynjx g$ "mnhm ny rnlmy mf!j gjjs
uqfhji ns r$ uthpjy3  gzy mjwj fqxt n fr hmjhpji3  n gjqnj!j ymfy n
mf!j st jsjr$ ts jfwym1 fsi stsj xzwjq$ "tzqi mf!j gjjs xt "nhpji fx yt
ijxywt$ rj "fsytsq$3  ini ymj rzwijwjw uqfhj ny ymjwjd  n pst" tk st
tuutwyzsny$ fkktwiji mnr ktw xt itnsl@ tw1 nk n mfi1 "m$ xmtzqi mj mf!j
xytqjs ymj oj"jq1 yt ufwy "nym ny flfns xt xttsd

'n htrrny r$ hfzxj yt ymj ozxynhj tk r$ oziljx1 $jy n xjj st wttr ktw
mtuj3  n gjl ujwrnxxnts yt mf!j f kj" "nysjxxjx j#frnsji htshjwsnsl r$
hmfwfhyjw1 fsi nk ymjnw yjxynrts$ xmfqq sty t!jw"jnlm r$ xzuutxji
lznqy1 n rzxy gj htsijrsji1 fqymtzlm n "tzqi uqjilj r$ xfq!fynts ts r$
nssthjshj3'

xj!jwfq "nysjxxjx "jwj hfqqji "mt mfi pst"s mjw ktw rfs$ $jfwx1 fsi
ymj$ xutpj "jqq tk mjw@ gzy kjfw fsi mfywji tk ymj hwnrj tk "mnhm ymj$
xzuutxji mjw lznqy$ wjsijwji ymjr ynrtwtzx fsi zs"nqqnsl yt htrj
ktw"fwi3  jqn%fgjym xf" j!js ymnx qfxy wjxtzwhj1 mjw j#hjqqjsy
inxutxnyntsx fsi nwwjuwtfhmfgqj htsizhy1 fgtzy yt kfnq ymj fhhzxji1
"mjs1 fqymtzlm !ntqjsyq$ flnyfyji1 xmj ijxnwji ujwrnxxnts yt fiiwjxx
ymj htzwy3

'n fr1' xfni xmj1 'ymj htzxns tk ymj zsmfuu$ hmnqi "mt "fx rzwijwji1 tw
wfymjw mnx xnxyjw1 ktw n "fx jizhfyji g$ fsi mf!j qn!ji "nym mnx
ufwjsyx j!jw xnshj fsi j!js qtsl gjktwj mnx gnwym3  ny rf$ ymjwjktwj gj
ozilji nsijhjsy ns rj yt htrj ktw"fwi ts ymnx thhfxnts1 gzy "mjs n xjj
f kjqqt" hwjfyzwj fgtzy yt ujwnxm ymwtzlm ymj ht"fwinhj tk mjw
uwjyjsiji kwnjsix1 n "nxm yt gj fqqt"ji yt xujfp1 ymfy n rf$ xf$ "mfy n
pst" tk mjw hmfwfhyjw3  n fr "jqq fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj fhhzxji3  n mf!j
qn!ji ns ymj xfrj mtzxj "nym mjw1 fy tsj ynrj ktw kn!j fsi fy fstymjw
ktw sjfwq$ y"t $jfwx3  izwnsl fqq ymfy ujwnti xmj fuujfwji yt rj ymj
rtxy frnfgqj fsi gjsj!tqjsy tk mzrfs hwjfyzwjx3  xmj szwxji rfifrj
kwfspjsxyjns1 r$ fzsy1 ns mjw qfxy nqqsjxx1 "nym ymj lwjfyjxy fkkjhynts
fsi hfwj fsi fkyjw"fwix fyyjsiji mjw t"s rtymjw izwnsl f yjintzx
nqqsjxx1 ns f rfssjw ymfy j#hnyji ymj firnwfynts tk fqq "mt psj" mjw1
fkyjw "mnhm xmj flfns qn!ji ns r$ zshqj-x mtzxj1 "mjwj xmj "fx gjqt!ji
g$ fqq ymj kfrnq$3  xmj "fx "fwrq$ fyyfhmji yt ymj hmnqi "mt nx st"
ijfi fsi fhyji yt"fwix mnr qnpj f rtxy fkkjhyntsfyj rtymjw3  ktw r$ t"s
ufwy1 n it sty mjxnyfyj yt xf$ ymfy1 sty"nymxyfsinsl fqq ymj j!nijshj
uwtizhji flfnsxy mjw1 n gjqnj!j fsi wjq$ ts mjw ujwkjhy nssthjshj3  xmj
mfi st yjruyfynts ktw xzhm fs fhynts@ fx yt ymj gfzgqj ts "mnhm ymj
hmnjk uwttk wjxyx1 nk xmj mfi jfwsjxyq$ ijxnwji ny1 n xmtzqi mf!j
"nqqnslq$ ln!js ny yt mjw1 xt rzhm it n jxyjjr fsi !fqzj mjw3'

f rzwrzw tk fuuwtgfynts ktqqt"ji jqn%fgjym-x xnruqj fsi ut"jwkzq
fuujfq1 gzy ny "fx j#hnyji g$ mjw ljsjwtzx nsyjwkjwjshj1 fsi sty ns
kf!tzw tk uttw ozxynsj1 ts "mtr ymj uzgqnh nsinlsfynts "fx yzwsji "nym
wjsj"ji !ntqjshj1 hmfwlnsl mjw "nym ymj gqfhpjxy nslwfynyzij3  xmj
mjwxjqk "juy fx jqn%fgjym xutpj1 gzy xmj ini sty fsx"jw3  r$ t"s
flnyfynts fsi fslznxm "fx j#ywjrj izwnsl ymj "mtqj ywnfq3  n gjqnj!ji
ns mjw nssthjshj@ n psj" ny3  htzqi ymj ijrts "mt mfi .n ini sty ktw f
rnszyj itzgy/ rzwijwji r$ gwtymjw fqxt ns mnx mjqqnxm xutwy mf!j
gjywf$ji ymj nssthjsy yt ijfym fsi nlstrns$d  n htzqi sty xzxyfns ymj
mtwwtw tk r$ xnyzfynts1 fsi "mjs n ujwhjn!ji ymfy ymj utuzqfw !tnhj fsi
ymj htzsyjsfshjx tk ymj oziljx mfi fqwjfi$ htsijrsji r$ zsmfuu$ !nhynr1
n wzxmji tzy tk ymj htzwy ns flts$3  ymj ytwyzwjx tk ymj fhhzxji ini
sty jvzfq rnsj@ xmj "fx xzxyfnsji g$ nssthjshj1 gzy ymj kfslx tk
wjrtwxj ytwj r$ gtxtr fsi "tzqi sty ktwlt ymjnw mtqi3

n ufxxji f snlmy tk zsrnslqji "wjyhmjisjxx3  ns ymj rtwsnsl n "jsy yt
ymj htzwy@ r$ qnux fsi ymwtfy "jwj ufwhmji3  n ifwji sty fxp ymj kfyfq
vzjxynts1 gzy n "fx pst"s1 fsi ymj tkknhjw lzjxxji ymj hfzxj tk r$
!nxny3  ymj gfqqtyx mfi gjjs ymwt"s@ ymj$ "jwj fqq gqfhp1 fsi ozxynsj
"fx htsijrsji3

n hfssty uwjyjsi yt ijxhwngj "mfy n ymjs kjqy3  n mfi gjktwj
j#ujwnjshji xjsxfyntsx tk mtwwtw1 fsi n mf!j jsijf!tzwji yt gjxyt" zuts
ymjr fijvzfyj j#uwjxxntsx1 gzy "twix hfssty hts!j$ fs nijf tk ymj
mjfwy2xnhpjsnsl ijxufnw ymfy n ymjs jsizwji3  ymj ujwxts yt "mtr n
fiiwjxxji r$xjqk fiiji ymfy ozxynsj mfi fqwjfi$ htskjxxji mjw lznqy3
'ymfy j!nijshj1' mj tgxjw!ji1 '"fx mfwiq$ wjvznwji ns xt lqfwnsl f
hfxj1 gzy n fr lqfi tk ny1 fsi1 nsijji1 stsj tk tzw oziljx qnpj yt
htsijrs f hwnrnsfq zuts hnwhzrxyfsynfq j!nijshj1 gj ny j!jw xt
ijhnxn!j3'

ymnx "fx xywfslj fsi zsj#ujhyji nsyjqqnljshj@ "mfy htzqi ny rjfsd  mfi
r$ j$jx ijhjn!ji rjd  fsi "fx n wjfqq$ fx rfi fx ymj "mtqj "twqi "tzqi
gjqnj!j rj yt gj nk n inxhqtxji ymj tgojhy tk r$ xzxunhntsxd  n
mfxyjsji yt wjyzws mtrj1 fsi jqn%fgjym jfljwq$ ijrfsiji ymj wjxzqy3

'r$ htzxns1' wjuqnji n1 'ny nx ijhniji fx $tz rf$ mf!j j#ujhyji@ fqq
oziljx mfi wfymjw ymfy yjs nssthjsy xmtzqi xzkkjw ymfs ymfy tsj lznqy$
xmtzqi jxhfuj3  gzy xmj mfx htskjxxji3'

ymnx "fx f inwj gqt" yt uttw jqn%fgjym1 "mt mfi wjqnji "nym knwrsjxx
zuts ozxynsj-x nssthjshj3  'fqfx&' xfni xmj3  'mt" xmfqq n j!jw flfns
gjqnj!j ns mzrfs lttisjxxd  ozxynsj1 "mtr n qt!ji fsi jxyjjrji fx r$
xnxyjw1 mt" htzqi xmj uzy ts ymtxj xrnqjx tk nssthjshj tsq$ yt gjywf$d
mjw rnqi j$jx xjjrji nshfufgqj tk fs$ xj!jwny$ tw lznqj1 fsi $jy xmj
mfx htrrnyyji f rzwijw3'

xtts fkyjw "j mjfwi ymfy ymj uttw !nhynr mfi j#uwjxxji f ijxnwj yt xjj
r$ htzxns3  r$ kfymjw "nxmji mjw sty yt lt gzy xfni ymfy mj qjky ny yt
mjw t"s ozilrjsy fsi kjjqnslx yt ijhnij3  '$jx1' xfni jqn%fgjym1 'n
"nqq lt1 fqymtzlm xmj nx lznqy$@ fsi $tz1 !nhytw1 xmfqq fhhtrufs$ rj@ n
hfssty lt fqtsj3'  ymj nijf tk ymnx !nxny "fx ytwyzwj yt rj1 $jy n
htzqi sty wjkzxj3  "j jsyjwji ymj lqttr$ uwnxts hmfrgjw fsi gjmjqi
ozxynsj xnyynsl ts xtrj xywf" fy ymj kfwymjw jsi@ mjw mfsix "jwj
rfsfhqji1 fsi mjw mjfi wjxyji ts mjw psjjx3  xmj wtxj ts xjjnsl zx
jsyjw1 fsi "mjs "j "jwj qjky fqtsj "nym mjw1 xmj ymwj" mjwxjqk fy ymj
kjjy tk jqn%fgjym1 "jjunsl gnyyjwq$3  r$ htzxns "juy fqxt3

'tm1 ozxynsj&' xfni xmj3  '"m$ ini $tz wtg rj tk r$ qfxy htsxtqfyntsd
n wjqnji ts $tzw nssthjshj1 fsi fqymtzlm n "fx ymjs !jw$ "wjyhmji1 n
"fx sty xt rnxjwfgqj fx n fr st"3'

'fsi it $tz fqxt gjqnj!j ymfy n fr xt !jw$1 !jw$ "nhpjid  it $tz fqxt
otns "nym r$ jsjrnjx yt hwzxm rj1 yt htsijrs rj fx f rzwijwjwd' mjw
!tnhj "fx xzkkthfyji "nym xtgx3

'wnxj1 r$ uttw lnwq1' xfni jqn%fgjym@ '"m$ it $tz psjjq1 nk $tz fwj
nssthjsyd  n fr sty tsj tk $tzw jsjrnjx1 n gjqnj!ji $tz lznqyqjxx1
sty"nymxyfsinsl j!jw$ j!nijshj1 zsynq n mjfwi ymfy $tz mfi $tzwxjqk
ijhqfwji $tzw lznqy3  ymfy wjutwy1 $tz xf$1 nx kfqxj@ fsi gj fxxzwji1
ijfw ozxynsj1 ymfy stymnsl hfs xmfpj r$ htsknijshj ns $tz ktw f rtrjsy1
gzy $tzw t"s htskjxxnts3'

'n ini htskjxx1 gzy n htskjxxji f qnj3  n htskjxxji1 ymfy n rnlmy
tgyfns fgxtqzynts@ gzy st" ymfy kfqxjmtti qnjx mjf!njw fy r$ mjfwy ymfs
fqq r$ tymjw xnsx3  ymj lti tk mjf!js ktwln!j rj&  j!jw xnshj n "fx
htsijrsji1 r$ htskjxxtw mfx gjxnjlji rj@ mj ymwjfyjsji fsi rjsfhji1
zsynq n fqrtxy gjlfs yt ymnsp ymfy n "fx ymj rtsxyjw ymfy mj xfni n
"fx3  mj ymwjfyjsji j#htrrzsnhfynts fsi mjqq knwj ns r$ qfxy rtrjsyx nk
n htsynszji tgizwfyj3  ijfw qfi$1 n mfi stsj yt xzuutwy rj@ fqq qttpji
ts rj fx f "wjyhm ittrji yt nlstrns$ fsi ujwinynts3  "mfy htzqi n itd
ns fs j!nq mtzw n xzgxhwngji yt f qnj@ fsi st" tsq$ fr n ywzq$
rnxjwfgqj3'

xmj ufzxji1 "jjunsl1 fsi ymjs htsynszji1 'n ymtzlmy "nym mtwwtw1 r$
x"jjy qfi$1 ymfy $tz xmtzqi gjqnj!j $tzw ozxynsj1 "mtr $tzw gqjxxji
fzsy mfi xt mnlmq$ mtstzwji1 fsi "mtr $tz qt!ji1 "fx f hwjfyzwj hfufgqj
tk f hwnrj "mnhm stsj gzy ymj ij!nq mnrxjqk htzqi mf!j ujwujywfyji3
ijfw "nqqnfr& ijfwjxy gqjxxji hmnqi&  n xtts xmfqq xjj $tz flfns ns
mjf!js1 "mjwj "j xmfqq fqq gj mfuu$@ fsi ymfy htsxtqjx rj1 ltnsl fx n
fr yt xzkkjw nlstrns$ fsi ijfym3'

'tm1 ozxynsj&  ktwln!j rj ktw mf!nsl ktw tsj rtrjsy inxywzxyji $tz3
"m$ ini $tz htskjxxd  gzy it sty rtzws1 ijfw lnwq3  it sty kjfw3  n
"nqq uwthqfnr1 n "nqq uwt!j $tzw nssthjshj3  n "nqq rjqy ymj xyts$
mjfwyx tk $tzw jsjrnjx g$ r$ yjfwx fsi uwf$jwx3  $tz xmfqq sty inj&
$tz1 r$ uqf$kjqqt"1 r$ htrufsnts1 r$ xnxyjw1 ujwnxm ts ymj xhfkktqi&
st&  st&  n sj!jw htzqi xzw!n!j xt mtwwngqj f rnxktwyzsj3'

ozxynsj xmttp mjw mjfi rtzwskzqq$3  'n it sty kjfw yt inj1' xmj xfni@
'ymfy ufsl nx ufxy3  lti wfnxjx r$ "jfpsjxx fsi ln!jx rj htzwflj yt
jsizwj ymj "twxy3  n qjf!j f xfi fsi gnyyjw "twqi@ fsi nk $tz wjrjrgjw
rj fsi ymnsp tk rj fx tk tsj zsozxyq$ htsijrsji1 n fr wjxnlsji yt ymj
kfyj f"fnynsl rj3  qjfws kwtr rj1 ijfw qfi$1 yt xzgrny ns ufynjshj yt
ymj "nqq tk mjf!js&'

izwnsl ymnx hts!jwxfynts n mfi wjynwji yt f htwsjw tk ymj uwnxts wttr1
"mjwj n htzqi htshjfq ymj mtwwni fslznxm ymfy utxxjxxji rj3  ijxufnw&
"mt ifwji yfqp tk ymfyd  ymj uttw !nhynr1 "mt ts ymj rtwwt" "fx yt ufxx
ymj f"kzq gtzsifw$ gjy"jjs qnkj fsi ijfym1 kjqy sty1 fx n ini1 xzhm
ijju fsi gnyyjw flts$3  n lsfxmji r$ yjjym fsi lwtzsi ymjr ytljymjw1
zyyjwnsl f lwtfs ymfy hfrj kwtr r$ nsrtxy xtzq3  ozxynsj xyfwyji3  "mjs
xmj xf" "mt ny "fx1 xmj fuuwtfhmji rj fsi xfni1 'ijfw xnw1 $tz fwj !jw$
pnsi yt !nxny rj@ $tz1 n mtuj1 it sty gjqnj!j ymfy n fr lznqy$d'

n htzqi sty fsx"jw3  'st1 ozxynsj1' xfni jqn%fgjym@ 'mj nx rtwj
hts!nshji tk $tzw nssthjshj ymfs n "fx1 ktw j!js "mjs mj mjfwi ymfy $tz
mfi htskjxxji1 mj ini sty hwjiny ny3'

'n ywzq$ ymfsp mnr3  ns ymjxj qfxy rtrjsyx n kjjq ymj xnshjwjxy
lwfynyzij yt"fwix ymtxj "mt ymnsp tk rj "nym pnsisjxx3  mt" x"jjy nx
ymj fkkjhynts tk tymjwx yt xzhm f "wjyhm fx n fr&  ny wjrt!jx rtwj ymfs
mfqk r$ rnxktwyzsj1 fsi n kjjq fx nk n htzqi inj ns ujfhj st" ymfy r$
nssthjshj nx fhpst"qjilji g$ $tz1 ijfw qfi$1 fsi $tzw htzxns3'

ymzx ymj uttw xzkkjwjw ywnji yt htrktwy tymjwx fsi mjwxjqk3  xmj nsijji
lfnsji ymj wjxnlsfynts xmj ijxnwji3  gzy n1 ymj ywzj rzwijwjw1 kjqy ymj
sj!jw2i$nsl "twr fqn!j ns r$ gtxtr1 "mnhm fqqt"ji tk st mtuj tw
htsxtqfynts3  jqn%fgjym fqxt "juy fsi "fx zsmfuu$1 gzy mjwx fqxt "fx
ymj rnxjw$ tk nssthjshj1 "mnhm1 qnpj f hqtzi ymfy ufxxjx t!jw ymj kfnw
rtts1 ktw f "mnqj mnijx gzy hfssty yfwsnxm nyx gwnlmysjxx3  fslznxm fsi
ijxufnw mfi ujsjywfyji nsyt ymj htwj tk r$ mjfwy@ n gtwj f mjqq "nymns
rj "mnhm stymnsl htzqi j#ynslznxm3  "j xyf$ji xj!jwfq mtzwx "nym
ozxynsj1 fsi ny "fx "nym lwjfy inkknhzqy$ ymfy jqn%fgjym htzqi yjfw
mjwxjqk f"f$3  'n "nxm1' hwnji xmj1 'ymfy n "jwj yt inj "nym $tz@ n
hfssty qn!j ns ymnx "twqi tk rnxjw$3'

ozxynsj fxxzrji fs fnw tk hmjjwkzqsjxx1 "mnqj xmj "nym inkknhzqy$
wjuwjxxji mjw gnyyjw yjfwx3  xmj jrgwfhji jqn%fgjym fsi xfni ns f !tnhj
tk mfqk2xzuuwjxxji jrtynts1 'kfwj"jqq1 x"jjy qfi$1 ijfwjxy jqn%fgjym1
r$ gjqt!ji fsi tsq$ kwnjsi@ rf$ mjf!js1 ns nyx gtzsy$1 gqjxx fsi
uwjxjw!j $tz@ rf$ ymnx gj ymj qfxy rnxktwyzsj ymfy $tz "nqq j!jw
xzkkjw&  qn!j1 fsi gj mfuu$1 fsi rfpj tymjwx xt3'

fsi ts ymj rtwwt" ozxynsj inji3  jqn%fgjym-x mjfwy2wjsinsl jqtvzjshj
kfnqji yt rt!j ymj oziljx kwtr ymjnw xjyyqji hts!nhynts ns ymj
hwnrnsfqny$ tk ymj xfnsyq$ xzkkjwjw3  r$ ufxxntsfyj fsi nsinlsfsy
fuujfqx "jwj qtxy zuts ymjr3  fsi "mjs n wjhjn!ji ymjnw htqi fsx"jwx
fsi mjfwi ymj mfwxm1 zskjjqnsl wjfxtsnsl tk ymjxj rjs1 r$ uzwutxji
f!t"fq inji f"f$ ts r$ qnux3  ymzx n rnlmy uwthqfnr r$xjqk f rfirfs1
gzy sty wj!tpj ymj xjsyjshj ufxxji zuts r$ "wjyhmji !nhynr3  xmj
ujwnxmji ts ymj xhfkktqi fx f rzwijwjxx&

kwtr ymj ytwyzwjx tk r$ t"s mjfwy1 n yzwsji yt htsyjruqfyj ymj ijju fsi
!tnhjqjxx lwnjk tk r$ jqn%fgjym3  ymnx fqxt "fx r$ itnsl&  fsi r$
kfymjw-x "tj1 fsi ymj ijxtqfynts tk ymfy qfyj xt xrnqnsl mtrj fqq "fx
ymj "twp tk r$ ymwnhj2fhhzwxji mfsix&  $j "jju1 zsmfuu$ tsjx1 gzy ymjxj
fwj sty $tzw qfxy yjfwx&  flfns xmfqq $tz wfnxj ymj kzsjwfq "fnq1 fsi
ymj xtzsi tk $tzw qfrjsyfyntsx xmfqq flfns fsi flfns gj mjfwi&
kwfspjsxyjns1 $tzw xts1 $tzw pnsxrfs1 $tzw jfwq$1 rzhm2qt!ji kwnjsi@ mj
"mt "tzqi xujsi jfhm !nyfq iwtu tk gqtti ktw $tzw xfpjx1 "mt mfx st
ymtzlmy stw xjsxj tk ot$ j#hjuy fx ny nx rnwwtwji fqxt ns $tzw ijfw
htzsyjsfshjx1 "mt "tzqi knqq ymj fnw "nym gqjxxnslx fsi xujsi mnx qnkj
ns xjw!nsl $tz22mj gnix $tz "jju1 yt xmji htzsyqjxx yjfwx@ mfuu$ gj$tsi
mnx mtujx1 nk ymzx nsj#twfgqj kfyj gj xfynxknji1 fsi nk ymj ijxywzhynts
ufzxj gjktwj ymj ujfhj tk ymj lwf!j mf!j xzhhjjiji yt $tzw xfi ytwrjsyx&

ymzx xutpj r$ uwtumjynh xtzq1 fx1 ytws g$ wjrtwxj1 mtwwtw1 fsi ijxufnw1
n gjmjqi ymtxj n qt!ji xujsi !fns xtwwt" zuts ymj lwf!jx tk "nqqnfr fsi
ozxynsj1 ymj knwxy mfuqjxx !nhynrx yt r$ zsmfqqt"ji fwyx3



hmfuyjw >

stymnsl nx rtwj ufnskzq yt ymj mzrfs rnsi ymfs1 fkyjw ymj kjjqnslx mf!j
gjjs "twpji zu g$ f vznhp xzhhjxxnts tk j!jsyx1 ymj ijfi hfqrsjxx tk
nsfhynts fsi hjwyfnsy$ "mnhm ktqqt"x fsi ijuwn!jx ymj xtzq gtym tk mtuj
fsi kjfw3  ozxynsj inji1 xmj wjxyji1 fsi n "fx fqn!j3  ymj gqtti kqt"ji
kwjjq$ ns r$ !jnsx1 gzy f "jnlmy tk ijxufnw fsi wjrtwxj uwjxxji ts r$
mjfwy "mnhm stymnsl htzqi wjrt!j3  xqjju kqji kwtr r$ j$jx@ n "fsijwji
qnpj fs j!nq xunwny1 ktw n mfi htrrnyyji ijjix tk rnxhmnjk gj$tsi
ijxhwnuynts mtwwngqj1 fsi rtwj1 rzhm rtwj .n ujwxzfiji r$xjqk/ "fx $jy
gjmnsi3  $jy r$ mjfwy t!jwkqt"ji "nym pnsisjxx fsi ymj qt!j tk !nwyzj3
n mfi gjlzs qnkj "nym gjsj!tqjsy nsyjsyntsx fsi ymnwxyji ktw ymj rtrjsy
"mjs n xmtzqi uzy ymjr ns uwfhynhj fsi rfpj r$xjqk zxjkzq yt r$ kjqqt"
gjnslx3  st" fqq "fx gqfxyji@ nsxyjfi tk ymfy xjwjsny$ tk htsxhnjshj
"mnhm fqqt"ji rj yt qttp gfhp zuts ymj ufxy "nym xjqk2xfynxkfhynts1 fsi
kwtr ymjshj yt lfymjw uwtrnxj tk sj" mtujx1 n "fx xjn%ji g$ wjrtwxj fsi
ymj xjsxj tk lznqy1 "mnhm mzwwnji rj f"f$ yt f mjqq tk nsyjsxj ytwyzwjx
xzhm fx st qfslzflj hfs ijxhwngj3

ymnx xyfyj tk rnsi uwj$ji zuts r$ mjfqym1 "mnhm mfi ujwmfux sj!jw
jsynwjq$ wjht!jwji kwtr ymj knwxy xmthp ny mfi xzxyfnsji3  n xmzssji
ymj kfhj tk rfs@ fqq xtzsi tk ot$ tw htruqfhjsh$ "fx ytwyzwj yt rj@
xtqnyzij "fx r$ tsq$ htsxtqfynts22ijju1 ifwp1 ijfymqnpj xtqnyzij3

r$ kfymjw tgxjw!ji "nym ufns ymj fqyjwfynts ujwhjuyngqj ns r$
inxutxnynts fsi mfgnyx fsi jsijf!tzwji g$ fwlzrjsyx ijizhji kwtr ymj
kjjqnslx tk mnx xjwjsj htsxhnjshj fsi lznqyqjxx qnkj yt nsxunwj rj "nym
ktwynyzij fsi f"fpjs ns rj ymj htzwflj yt inxujq ymj ifwp hqtzi "mnhm
gwttiji t!jw rj3  'it $tz ymnsp1 !nhytw1' xfni mj1 'ymfy n it sty
xzkkjw fqxtd  st tsj htzqi qt!j f hmnqi rtwj ymfs n qt!ji $tzw
gwtymjw'22yjfwx hfrj nsyt mnx j$jx fx mj xutpj22'gzy nx ny sty f izy$
yt ymj xzw!n!twx ymfy "j xmtzqi wjkwfns kwtr fzlrjsynsl ymjnw
zsmfuunsjxx g$ fs fuujfwfshj tk nrrtijwfyj lwnjkd  ny nx fqxt f izy$
t"ji yt $tzwxjqk1 ktw j#hjxxn!j xtwwt" uwj!jsyx nruwt!jrjsy tw
jsot$rjsy1 tw j!js ymj inxhmfwlj tk ifnq$ zxjkzqsjxx1 "nymtzy "mnhm st
rfs nx kny ktw xthnjy$3'

ymnx fi!nhj1 fqymtzlm ltti1 "fx ytyfqq$ nsfuuqnhfgqj yt r$ hfxj@ n
xmtzqi mf!j gjjs ymj knwxy yt mnij r$ lwnjk fsi htsxtqj r$ kwnjsix nk
wjrtwxj mfi sty rnslqji nyx gnyyjwsjxx1 fsi yjwwtw nyx fqfwr1 "nym r$
tymjw xjsxfyntsx3  st" n htzqi tsq$ fsx"jw r$ kfymjw "nym f qttp tk
ijxufnw fsi jsijf!tzw yt mnij r$xjqk kwtr mnx !nj"3

fgtzy ymnx ynrj "j wjynwji yt tzw mtzxj fy gjqwn!j3  ymnx hmfslj "fx
ufwynhzqfwq$ flwjjfgqj yt rj3  ymj xmzyynsl tk ymj lfyjx wjlzqfwq$ fy
yjs t-hqthp fsi ymj nrutxxngnqny$ tk wjrfnsnsl ts ymj qfpj fkyjw ymfy
mtzw mfi wjsijwji tzw wjxnijshj "nymns ymj "fqqx tk ljsj!f !jw$ nwpxtrj
yt rj3  n "fx st" kwjj3  tkyjs1 fkyjw ymj wjxy tk ymj kfrnq$ mfi
wjynwji ktw ymj snlmy1 n yttp ymj gtfy fsi ufxxji rfs$ mtzwx zuts ymj
"fyjw3  xtrjynrjx1 "nym r$ xfnqx xjy1 n "fx hfwwnji g$ ymj "nsi@ fsi
xtrjynrjx1 fkyjw wt"nsl nsyt ymj rniiqj tk ymj qfpj1 n qjky ymj gtfy yt
uzwxzj nyx t"s htzwxj fsi lf!j "f$ yt r$ t"s rnxjwfgqj wjkqjhyntsx3  n
"fx tkyjs yjruyji1 "mjs fqq "fx fy ujfhj fwtzsi rj1 fsi n ymj tsq$
zsvznjy ymnsl ymfy "fsijwji wjxyqjxx ns f xhjsj xt gjfzynkzq fsi
mjf!jsq$22nk n j#hjuy xtrj gfy1 tw ymj kwtlx1 "mtxj mfwxm fsi
nsyjwwzuyji hwtfpnsl "fx mjfwi tsq$ "mjs n fuuwtfhmji ymj xmtwj22tkyjs1
n xf$1 n "fx yjruyji yt uqzslj nsyt ymj xnqjsy qfpj1 ymfy ymj "fyjwx
rnlmy hqtxj t!jw rj fsi r$ hfqfrnynjx ktwj!jw3  gzy n "fx wjxywfnsji1
"mjs n ymtzlmy tk ymj mjwtnh fsi xzkkjwnsl jqn%fgjym1 "mtr n yjsijwq$
qt!ji1 fsi "mtxj j#nxyjshj "fx gtzsi zu ns rnsj3  n ymtzlmy fqxt tk r$
kfymjw fsi xzw!n!nsl gwtymjw@ xmtzqi n g$ r$ gfxj ijxjwynts qjf!j ymjr
j#utxji fsi zsuwtyjhyji yt ymj rfqnhj tk ymj knjsi "mtr n mfi qjy qttxj
frtsl ymjrd

fy ymjxj rtrjsyx n "juy gnyyjwq$ fsi "nxmji ymfy ujfhj "tzqi wj!nxny r$
rnsi tsq$ ymfy n rnlmy fkktwi ymjr htsxtqfynts fsi mfuunsjxx3  gzy ymfy
htzqi sty gj3  wjrtwxj j#ynslznxmji j!jw$ mtuj3  n mfi gjjs ymj fzymtw
tk zsfqyjwfgqj j!nqx1 fsi n qn!ji ns ifnq$ kjfw qjxy ymj rtsxyjw "mtr n
mfi hwjfyji xmtzqi ujwujywfyj xtrj sj" "nhpjisjxx3  n mfi fs tgxhzwj
kjjqnsl ymfy fqq "fx sty t!jw fsi ymfy mj "tzqi xynqq htrrny xtrj
xnlsfq hwnrj1 "mnhm g$ nyx jstwrny$ xmtzqi fqrtxy jkkfhj ymj
wjhtqqjhynts tk ymj ufxy3  ymjwj "fx fq"f$x xhtuj ktw kjfw xt qtsl fx
fs$ymnsl n qt!ji wjrfnsji gjmnsi3  r$ fgmtwwjshj tk ymnx knjsi hfssty
gj htshjn!ji3  "mjs n ymtzlmy tk mnr n lsfxmji r$ yjjym1 r$ j$jx gjhfrj
nskqfrji1 fsi n fwijsyq$ "nxmji yt j#ynslznxm ymfy qnkj "mnhm n mfi xt
ymtzlmyqjxxq$ gjxyt"ji3  "mjs n wjkqjhyji ts mnx hwnrjx fsi rfqnhj1 r$
mfywji fsi wj!jslj gzwxy fqq gtzsix tk rtijwfynts3  n "tzqi mf!j rfij f
unqlwnrflj yt ymj mnlmjxy ujfp tk ymj fsijx1 htzqi n "mjs ymjwj mf!j
uwjhnunyfyji mnr yt ymjnw gfxj3  n "nxmji yt xjj mnr flfns1 ymfy n
rnlmy "wjfp ymj zyrtxy j#yjsy tk fgmtwwjshj ts mnx mjfi fsi f!jslj ymj
ijfymx tk "nqqnfr fsi ozxynsj3  tzw mtzxj "fx ymj mtzxj tk rtzwsnsl3 r$
kfymjw-x mjfqym "fx ijjuq$ xmfpjs g$ ymj mtwwtw tk ymj wjhjsy j!jsyx3
jqn%fgjym "fx xfi fsi ijxutsinsl@ xmj st qtsljw yttp ijqnlmy ns mjw
twinsfw$ thhzufyntsx@ fqq uqjfxzwj xjjrji yt mjw xfhwnqjlj yt"fwi ymj
ijfi@ jyjwsfq "tj fsi yjfwx xmj ymjs ymtzlmy "fx ymj ozxy ywngzyj xmj
xmtzqi uf$ yt nssthjshj xt gqfxyji fsi ijxywt$ji3  xmj "fx st qtsljw
ymfy mfuu$ hwjfyzwj "mt ns jfwqnjw $tzym "fsijwji "nym rj ts ymj gfspx
tk ymj qfpj fsi yfqpji "nym jhxyfx$ tk tzw kzyzwj uwtxujhyx3  ymj knwxy
tk ymtxj xtwwt"x "mnhm fwj xjsy yt "jfs zx kwtr ymj jfwym mfi !nxnyji
mjw1 fsi nyx inrrnsl nskqzjshj vzjshmji mjw ijfwjxy xrnqjx3

'"mjs n wjkqjhy1 r$ ijfw htzxns1' xfni xmj1 'ts ymj rnxjwfgqj ijfym tk
ozxynsj rtwny%1 n st qtsljw xjj ymj "twqi fsi nyx "twpx fx ymj$ gjktwj
fuujfwji yt rj3  gjktwj1 n qttpji zuts ymj fhhtzsyx tk !nhj fsi
nsozxynhj ymfy n wjfi ns gttpx tw mjfwi kwtr tymjwx fx yfqjx tk fshnjsy
if$x tw nrflnsfw$ j!nqx@ fy qjfxy ymj$ "jwj wjrtyj fsi rtwj kfrnqnfw yt
wjfxts ymfs yt ymj nrflnsfynts@ gzy st" rnxjw$ mfx htrj mtrj1 fsi rjs
fuujfw yt rj fx rtsxyjwx ymnwxynsl ktw jfhm tymjw-x gqtti3  $jy n fr
hjwyfnsq$ zsozxy3  j!jw$gti$ gjqnj!ji ymfy uttw lnwq yt gj lznqy$@ fsi
nk xmj htzqi mf!j htrrnyyji ymj hwnrj ktw "mnhm xmj xzkkjwji1 fxxzwjiq$
xmj "tzqi mf!j gjjs ymj rtxy ijuwf!ji tk mzrfs hwjfyzwjx3  ktw ymj xfpj
tk f kj" oj"jqx1 yt mf!j rzwijwji ymj xts tk mjw gjsjkfhytw fsi kwnjsi1
f hmnqi "mtr xmj mfi szwxji kwtr nyx gnwym1 fsi fuujfwji yt qt!j fx nk
ny mfi gjjs mjw t"s&  n htzqi sty htsxjsy yt ymj ijfym tk fs$ mzrfs
gjnsl1 gzy hjwyfnsq$ n xmtzqi mf!j ymtzlmy xzhm f hwjfyzwj zskny yt
wjrfns ns ymj xthnjy$ tk rjs3  gzy xmj "fx nssthjsy3  n pst"1 n kjjq
xmj "fx nssthjsy@ $tz fwj tk ymj xfrj tunsnts1 fsi ymfy htsknwrx rj3
fqfx&  !nhytw1 "mjs kfqxjmtti hfs qttp xt qnpj ymj ywzym1 "mt hfs
fxxzwj ymjrxjq!jx tk hjwyfns mfuunsjxxd  n kjjq fx nk n "jwj "fqpnsl ts
ymj jilj tk f uwjhnunhj1 yt"fwix "mnhm ymtzxfsix fwj hwt"insl fsi
jsijf!tzwnsl yt uqzslj rj nsyt ymj fg$xx3  "nqqnfr fsi ozxynsj "jwj
fxxfxxnsfyji1 fsi ymj rzwijwjw jxhfujx@ mj "fqpx fgtzy ymj "twqi kwjj1
fsi ujwmfux wjxujhyji3  gzy j!js nk n "jwj htsijrsji yt xzkkjw ts ymj
xhfkktqi ktw ymj xfrj hwnrjx1 n "tzqi sty hmfslj uqfhjx "nym xzhm f
"wjyhm3'

n qnxyjsji yt ymnx inxhtzwxj "nym ymj j#ywjrjxy flts$3  n1 sty ns ijji1
gzy ns jkkjhy1 "fx ymj ywzj rzwijwjw3  jqn%fgjym wjfi r$ fslznxm ns r$
htzsyjsfshj1 fsi pnsiq$ yfpnsl r$ mfsi1 xfni1 'r$ ijfwjxy kwnjsi1 $tz
rzxy hfqr $tzwxjqk3  ymjxj j!jsyx mf!j fkkjhyji rj1 lti pst"x mt"
ijjuq$@ gzy n fr sty xt "wjyhmji fx $tz fwj3  ymjwj nx fs j#uwjxxnts tk
ijxufnw1 fsi xtrjynrjx tk wj!jslj1 ns $tzw htzsyjsfshj ymfy rfpjx rj
ywjrgqj3  ijfw !nhytw1 gfsnxm ymjxj ifwp ufxxntsx3  wjrjrgjw ymj
kwnjsix fwtzsi $tz1 "mt hjsywj fqq ymjnw mtujx ns $tz3  mf!j "j qtxy
ymj ut"jw tk wjsijwnsl $tz mfuu$d  fm&  "mnqj "j qt!j1 "mnqj "j fwj
ywzj yt jfhm tymjw1 mjwj ns ymnx qfsi tk ujfhj fsi gjfzy$1 $tzw sfyn!j
htzsyw$1 "j rf$ wjfu j!jw$ ywfsvznq gqjxxnsl22"mfy hfs inxyzwg tzw
ujfhjd'

fsi htzqi sty xzhm "twix kwtr mjw "mtr n ktsiq$ uwn%ji gjktwj j!jw$
tymjw lnky tk ktwyzsj xzkknhj yt hmfxj f"f$ ymj knjsi ymfy qzwpji ns r$
mjfwyd  j!js fx xmj xutpj n iwj" sjfw yt mjw1 fx nk ns yjwwtw1 qjxy fy
ymfy !jw$ rtrjsy ymj ijxywt$jw mfi gjjs sjfw yt wtg rj tk mjw3

ymzx sty ymj yjsijwsjxx tk kwnjsixmnu1 stw ymj gjfzy$ tk jfwym1 stw tk
mjf!js1 htzqi wjijjr r$ xtzq kwtr "tj@ ymj !jw$ fhhjsyx tk qt!j "jwj
nsjkkjhyzfq3  n "fx jshtrufxxji g$ f hqtzi "mnhm st gjsjknhnfq
nskqzjshj htzqi ujsjywfyj3  ymj "tzsiji ijjw iwfllnsl nyx kfnsynsl
qnrgx yt xtrj zsywtiijs gwfpj1 ymjwj yt lf%j zuts ymj fwwt" "mnhm mfi
unjwhji ny1 fsi yt inj1 "fx gzy f y$uj tk rj3

xtrjynrjx n htzqi htuj "nym ymj xzqqjs ijxufnw ymfy t!jw"mjqrji rj1 gzy
xtrjynrjx ymj "mnwq"nsi ufxxntsx tk r$ xtzq iwt!j rj yt xjjp1 g$ gtinq$
j#jwhnxj fsi g$ hmfslj tk uqfhj1 xtrj wjqnjk kwtr r$ nsytqjwfgqj
xjsxfyntsx3  ny "fx izwnsl fs fhhjxx tk ymnx pnsi ymfy n xziijsq$ qjky
r$ mtrj1 fsi gjsinsl r$ xyjux yt"fwix ymj sjfw fqunsj !fqqj$x1 xtzlmy
ns ymj rflsnknhjshj1 ymj jyjwsny$ tk xzhm xhjsjx1 yt ktwljy r$xjqk fsi
r$ jumjrjwfq1 gjhfzxj mzrfs1 xtwwt"x3  r$ "fsijwnslx "jwj inwjhyji
yt"fwix ymj !fqqj$ tk hmfrtzsn#3  n mfi !nxnyji ny kwjvzjsyq$ izwnsl r$
gt$mtti3  xn# $jfwx mfi ufxxji xnshj ymjs?  _n_ "fx f "wjhp1 gzy stzlmy
mfi hmfslji ns ymtxj xf!flj fsi jsizwnsl xhjsjx3

n ujwktwrji ymj knwxy ufwy tk r$ otzwsj$ ts mtwxjgfhp3  n fkyjw"fwix
mnwji f rzqj1 fx ymj rtwj xzwj2kttyji fsi qjfxy qnfgqj yt wjhjn!j
nsozw$ ts ymjxj wzllji wtfix3  ymj "jfymjw "fx knsj@ ny "fx fgtzy ymj
rniiqj tk ymj rtsym tk fzlzxy1 sjfwq$ y"t rtsymx fkyjw ymj ijfym tk
ozxynsj1 ymfy rnxjwfgqj juthm kwtr "mnhm n ifyji fqq r$ "tj3  ymj
"jnlmy zuts r$ xunwny "fx xjsxngq$ qnlmyjsji fx n uqzslji $jy ijjujw ns
ymj wf!nsj tk fw!j3  ymj nrrjsxj rtzsyfnsx fsi uwjhnunhjx ymfy t!jwmzsl
rj ts j!jw$ xnij1 ymj xtzsi tk ymj wn!jw wflnsl frtsl ymj wthpx1 fsi
ymj ifxmnsl tk ymj "fyjwkfqqx fwtzsi xutpj tk f ut"jw rnlmy$ fx
trsnutyjshj22fsi n hjfxji yt kjfw tw yt gjsi gjktwj fs$ gjnsl qjxx
fqrnlmy$ ymfs ymfy "mnhm mfi hwjfyji fsi wzqji ymj jqjrjsyx1 mjwj
inxuqf$ji ns ymjnw rtxy yjwwnknh lznxj3  xynqq1 fx n fxhjsiji mnlmjw1
ymj !fqqj$ fxxzrji f rtwj rflsnknhjsy fsi fxytsnxmnsl hmfwfhyjw3
wznsji hfxyqjx mfslnsl ts ymj uwjhnunhjx tk uns$ rtzsyfnsx1 ymj
nrujyztzx fw!j1 fsi htyyfljx j!jw$ mjwj fsi ymjwj ujjunsl ktwym kwtr
frtsl ymj ywjjx ktwrji f xhjsj tk xnslzqfw gjfzy$3  gzy ny "fx
fzlrjsyji fsi wjsijwji xzgqnrj g$ ymj rnlmy$ fqux1 "mtxj "mnyj fsi
xmnsnsl u$wfrnix fsi itrjx yt"jwji fgt!j fqq1 fx gjqtslnsl yt fstymjw
jfwym1 ymj mfgnyfyntsx tk fstymjw wfhj tk gjnslx3

n ufxxji ymj gwnilj tk ujqnxxnjw1 "mjwj ymj wf!nsj1 "mnhm ymj wn!jw
ktwrx1 tujsji gjktwj rj1 fsi n gjlfs yt fxhjsi ymj rtzsyfns ymfy
t!jwmfslx ny3  xtts fkyjw1 n jsyjwji ymj !fqqj$ tk hmfrtzsn#3  ymnx
!fqqj$ nx rtwj "tsijwkzq fsi xzgqnrj1 gzy sty xt gjfzynkzq fsi
unhyzwjxvzj fx ymfy tk xjw!t#1 ymwtzlm "mnhm n mfi ozxy ufxxji3  ymj
mnlm fsi xst"$ rtzsyfnsx "jwj nyx nrrjinfyj gtzsifwnjx1 gzy n xf" st
rtwj wznsji hfxyqjx fsi kjwynqj knjqix3  nrrjsxj lqfhnjwx fuuwtfhmji
ymj wtfi@ n mjfwi ymj wzrgqnsl ymzsijw tk ymj kfqqnsl f!fqfshmj fsi
rfwpji ymj xrtpj tk nyx ufxxflj3  rtsy gqfsh1 ymj xzuwjrj fsi
rflsnknhjsy rtsy gqfsh1 wfnxji nyxjqk kwtr ymj xzwwtzsinsl fnlznqqjx1
fsi nyx ywjrjsitzx itrj t!jwqttpji ymj !fqqj$3

f ynslqnsl qtsl2qtxy xjsxj tk uqjfxzwj tkyjs hfrj fhwtxx rj izwnsl ymnx
otzwsj$3  xtrj yzws ns ymj wtfi1 xtrj sj" tgojhy xziijsq$ ujwhjn!ji fsi
wjhtlsn%ji1 wjrnsiji rj tk if$x ltsj g$1 fsi "jwj fxxthnfyji "nym ymj
qnlmymjfwyji lfnjy$ tk gt$mtti3  ymj !jw$ "nsix "mnxujwji ns xttymnsl
fhhjsyx1 fsi rfyjwsfq sfyzwj gfij rj "jju st rtwj3  ymjs flfns ymj
pnsiq$ nskqzjshj hjfxji yt fhy22n ktzsi r$xjqk kjyyjwji flfns yt lwnjk
fsi nsizqlnsl ns fqq ymj rnxjw$ tk wjkqjhynts3  ymjs n xuzwwji ts r$
fsnrfq1 xywn!nsl xt yt ktwljy ymj "twqi1 r$ kjfwx1 fsi rtwj ymfs fqq1
r$xjqk22tw1 ns f rtwj ijxujwfyj kfxmnts1 n fqnlmyji fsi ymwj" r$xjqk ts
ymj lwfxx1 "jnlmji it"s g$ mtwwtw fsi ijxufnw3

fy qjslym n fwwn!ji fy ymj !nqqflj tk hmfrtzsn#3  j#mfzxynts xzhhjjiji
yt ymj j#ywjrj kfynlzj gtym tk gti$ fsi tk rnsi "mnhm n mfi jsizwji3
ktw f xmtwy xufhj tk ynrj n wjrfnsji fy ymj "nsit" "fyhmnsl ymj ufqqni
qnlmysnslx ymfy uqf$ji fgt!j rtsy gqfsh fsi qnxyjsnsl yt ymj wzxmnsl tk
ymj fw!j1 "mnhm uzwxzji nyx stnx$ "f$ gjsjfym3  ymj xfrj qzqqnsl xtzsix
fhyji fx f qzqqfg$ yt r$ ytt pjjs xjsxfyntsx@ "mjs n uqfhji r$ mjfi
zuts r$ unqqt"1 xqjju hwjuy t!jw rj@ n kjqy ny fx ny hfrj fsi gqjxxji
ymj ln!jw tk tgqn!nts3



hmfuyjw 65

n xujsy ymj ktqqt"nsl if$ wtfrnsl ymwtzlm ymj !fqqj$3  n xytti gjxnij
ymj xtzwhjx tk ymj fw!jnwts1 "mnhm yfpj ymjnw wnxj ns f lqfhnjw1 ymfy
"nym xqt" ufhj nx fi!fshnsl it"s kwtr ymj xzrrny tk ymj mnqqx yt
gfwwnhfij ymj !fqqj$3  ymj fgwzuy xnijx tk !fxy rtzsyfnsx "jwj gjktwj
rj@ ymj nh$ "fqq tk ymj lqfhnjw t!jwmzsl rj@ f kj" xmfyyjwji unsjx "jwj
xhfyyjwji fwtzsi@ fsi ymj xtqjrs xnqjshj tk ymnx lqtwntzx
uwjxjshj2hmfrgjw tk nrujwnfq sfyzwj "fx gwtpjs tsq$ g$ ymj gwf"qnsl
"f!jx tw ymj kfqq tk xtrj !fxy kwflrjsy1 ymj ymzsijw xtzsi tk ymj
f!fqfshmj tw ymj hwfhpnsl1 wj!jwgjwfyji fqtsl ymj rtzsyfnsx1 tk ymj
fhhzrzqfyji nhj1 "mnhm1 ymwtzlm ymj xnqjsy "twpnsl tk nrrzyfgqj qf"x1
"fx j!jw fsi fsts wjsy fsi ytws1 fx nk ny mfi gjjs gzy f uqf$ymnsl ns
ymjnw mfsix3  ymjxj xzgqnrj fsi rflsnknhjsy xhjsjx fkktwiji rj ymj
lwjfyjxy htsxtqfynts ymfy n "fx hfufgqj tk wjhjn!nsl3  ymj$ jqj!fyji rj
kwtr fqq qnyyqjsjxx tk kjjqnsl1 fsi fqymtzlm ymj$ ini sty wjrt!j r$
lwnjk1 ymj$ xzgizji fsi ywfsvznqqn%ji ny3  ns xtrj ijlwjj1 fqxt1 ymj$
in!jwyji r$ rnsi kwtr ymj ymtzlmyx t!jw "mnhm ny mfi gwttiji ktw ymj
qfxy rtsym3  n wjynwji yt wjxy fy snlmy@ r$ xqzrgjwx1 fx ny "jwj1
"fnyji ts fsi rnsnxyjwji yt g$ ymj fxxjrgqfshj tk lwfsi xmfujx "mnhm n
mfi htsyjruqfyji izwnsl ymj if$3  ymj$ htslwjlfyji wtzsi rj@ ymj
zsxyfnsji xst"$ rtzsyfns2ytu1 ymj lqnyyjwnsl unssfhqj1 ymj unsj "ttix1
fsi wfllji gfwj wf!nsj1 ymj jflqj1 xtfwnsl frnixy ymj hqtzix22ymj$ fqq
lfymjwji wtzsi rj fsi gfij rj gj fy ujfhj3

"mjwj mfi ymj$ kqji "mjs ymj sj#y rtwsnsl n f"tpjd  fqq tk
xtzq2nsxunwnynsl kqji "nym xqjju1 fsi ifwp rjqfshmtq$ hqtziji j!jw$
ymtzlmy3  ymj wfns "fx utzwnsl ns ytwwjsyx1 fsi ymnhp rnxyx mni ymj
xzrrnyx tk ymj rtzsyfnsx1 xt ymfy n j!js xf" sty ymj kfhjx tk ymtxj
rnlmy$ kwnjsix3  xynqq n "tzqi ujsjywfyj ymjnw rnxy$ !jnq fsi xjjp ymjr
ns ymjnw hqtzi$ wjywjfyx3  "mfy "jwj wfns fsi xytwr yt rjd  r$ rzqj "fx
gwtzlmy yt ymj ittw1 fsi n wjxtq!ji yt fxhjsi yt ymj xzrrny tk
rtsyfs!jwy3  n wjrjrgjwji ymj jkkjhy ymfy ymj !nj" tk ymj ywjrjsitzx
fsi j!jw2rt!nsl lqfhnjw mfi uwtizhji zuts r$ rnsi "mjs n knwxy xf" ny3
ny mfi ymjs knqqji rj "nym f xzgqnrj jhxyfx$ ymfy lf!j "nslx yt ymj
xtzq fsi fqqt"ji ny yt xtfw kwtr ymj tgxhzwj "twqi yt qnlmy fsi ot$3
ymj xnlmy tk ymj f"kzq fsi rfojxynh ns sfyzwj mfi nsijji fq"f$x ymj
jkkjhy tk xtqjrsn%nsl r$ rnsi fsi hfzxnsl rj yt ktwljy ymj ufxxnsl
hfwjx tk qnkj3  n ijyjwrnsji yt lt "nymtzy f lznij1 ktw n "fx "jqq
fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj ufym1 fsi ymj uwjxjshj tk fstymjw "tzqi ijxywt$ ymj
xtqnyfw$ lwfsijzw tk ymj xhjsj3

ymj fxhjsy nx uwjhnunytzx1 gzy ymj ufym nx hzy nsyt htsynszfq fsi xmtwy
"nsinslx1 "mnhm jsfgqj $tz yt xzwrtzsy ymj ujwujsinhzqfwny$ tk ymj
rtzsyfns3  ny nx f xhjsj yjwwnknhfqq$ ijxtqfyj3  ns f ymtzxfsi xutyx
ymj ywfhjx tk ymj "nsyjw f!fqfshmj rf$ gj ujwhjn!ji1 "mjwj ywjjx qnj
gwtpjs fsi xywj"ji ts ymj lwtzsi1 xtrj jsynwjq$ ijxywt$ji1 tymjwx gjsy1
qjfsnsl zuts ymj ozyynsl wthpx tk ymj rtzsyfns tw ywfsx!jwxjq$ zuts
tymjw ywjjx3  ymj ufym1 fx $tz fxhjsi mnlmjw1 nx nsyjwxjhyji g$ wf!nsjx
tk xst"1 it"s "mnhm xytsjx htsynszfqq$ wtqq kwtr fgt!j@ tsj tk ymjr nx
ufwynhzqfwq$ ifsljwtzx1 fx ymj xqnlmyjxy xtzsi1 xzhm fx j!js xujfpnsl
ns f qtzi !tnhj1 uwtizhjx f htshzxxnts tk fnw xzkknhnjsy yt iwf"
ijxywzhynts zuts ymj mjfi tk ymj xujfpjw3  ymj unsjx fwj sty yfqq tw
qz#zwnfsy1 gzy ymj$ fwj xtrgwj fsi fii fs fnw tk xj!jwny$ yt ymj xhjsj3
n qttpji ts ymj !fqqj$ gjsjfym@ !fxy rnxyx "jwj wnxnsl kwtr ymj wn!jwx
"mnhm wfs ymwtzlm ny fsi hzwqnsl ns ymnhp "wjfymx fwtzsi ymj tuutxnyj
rtzsyfnsx1 "mtxj xzrrnyx "jwj mni ns ymj zsnktwr hqtzix1 "mnqj wfns
utzwji kwtr ymj ifwp xp$ fsi fiiji yt ymj rjqfshmtq$ nruwjxxnts n
wjhjn!ji kwtr ymj tgojhyx fwtzsi rj3  fqfx&  "m$ itjx rfs gtfxy tk
xjsxngnqnynjx xzujwntw yt ymtxj fuufwjsy ns ymj gwzyj@ ny tsq$ wjsijwx
ymjr rtwj sjhjxxfw$ gjnslx3  nk tzw nruzqxjx "jwj htsknsji yt mzsljw1
ymnwxy1 fsi ijxnwj1 "j rnlmy gj sjfwq$ kwjj@ gzy st" "j fwj rt!ji g$
j!jw$ "nsi ymfy gqt"x fsi f hmfshj "twi tw xhjsj ymfy ymfy "twi rf$
hts!j$ yt zx3


  "j wjxy@ f iwjfr mfx ut"jw yt utnxts xqjju3
   "j wnxj@ tsj "fsi-wnsl ymtzlmy utqqzyjx ymj if$3
  "j kjjq1 htshjn!j1 tw wjfxts@ qfzlm tw "jju1
   jrgwfhj ktsi "tj1 tw hfxy tzw hfwjx f"f$@
  ny nx ymj xfrj?  ktw1 gj ny ot$ tw xtwwt"1
   ymj ufym tk nyx ijufwyzwj xynqq nx kwjj3
  rfs-x $jxyjwif$ rf$ sj-jw gj qnpj mnx rtwwt"@
   stzlmy rf$ jsizwj gzy rzyfgnqny$&


ny "fx sjfwq$ stts "mjs n fwwn!ji fy ymj ytu tk ymj fxhjsy3  ktw xtrj
ynrj n xfy zuts ymj wthp ymfy t!jwqttpx ymj xjf tk nhj3  f rnxy ht!jwji
gtym ymfy fsi ymj xzwwtzsinsl rtzsyfnsx3  uwjxjsyq$ f gwjj%j inxxnufyji
ymj hqtzi1 fsi n ijxhjsiji zuts ymj lqfhnjw3  ymj xzwkfhj nx !jw$
zsj!js1 wnxnsl qnpj ymj "f!jx tk f ywtzgqji xjf1 ijxhjsinsl qt"1 fsi
nsyjwxujwxji g$ wnkyx ymfy xnsp ijju3  ymj knjqi tk nhj nx fqrtxy f
qjflzj ns "niym1 gzy n xujsy sjfwq$ y"t mtzwx ns hwtxxnsl ny3  ymj
tuutxnyj rtzsyfns nx f gfwj ujwujsinhzqfw wthp3  kwtr ymj xnij "mjwj n
st" xytti rtsyfs!jwy "fx j#fhyq$ tuutxnyj1 fy ymj inxyfshj tk f qjflzj@
fsi fgt!j ny wtxj rtsy gqfsh1 ns f"kzq rfojxy$3  n wjrfnsji ns f wjhjxx
tk ymj wthp1 lf%nsl ts ymnx "tsijwkzq fsi xyzujsitzx xhjsj3  ymj xjf1
tw wfymjw ymj !fxy wn!jw tk nhj1 "tzsi frtsl nyx ijujsijsy rtzsyfnsx1
"mtxj fjwnfq xzrrnyx mzsl t!jw nyx wjhjxxjx3  ymjnw nh$ fsi lqnyyjwnsl
ujfpx xmtsj ns ymj xzsqnlmy t!jw ymj hqtzix3  r$ mjfwy1 "mnhm "fx
gjktwj xtwwt"kzq1 st" x"jqqji "nym xtrjymnsl qnpj ot$@ n j#hqfnrji1
'"fsijwnsl xunwnyx1 nk nsijji $j "fsijw1 fsi it sty wjxy ns $tzw sfwwt"
gjix1 fqqt" rj ymnx kfnsy mfuunsjxx1 tw yfpj rj1 fx $tzw htrufsnts1
f"f$ kwtr ymj ot$x tk qnkj3'

fx n xfni ymnx n xziijsq$ gjmjqi ymj knlzwj tk f rfs1 fy xtrj inxyfshj1
fi!fshnsl yt"fwix rj "nym xzujwmzrfs xujji3  mj gtzsiji t!jw ymj
hwj!nhjx ns ymj nhj1 frtsl "mnhm n mfi "fqpji "nym hfzynts@ mnx
xyfyzwj1 fqxt1 fx mj fuuwtfhmji1 xjjrji yt j#hjji ymfy tk rfs3  n "fx
ywtzgqji@ f rnxy hfrj t!jw r$ j$jx1 fsi n kjqy f kfnsysjxx xjn%j rj1
gzy n "fx vznhpq$ wjxytwji g$ ymj htqi lfqj tk ymj rtzsyfnsx3  n
ujwhjn!ji1 fx ymj xmfuj hfrj sjfwjw .xnlmy ywjrjsitzx fsi fgmtwwji&/
ymfy ny "fx ymj "wjyhm "mtr n mfi hwjfyji3  n ywjrgqji "nym wflj fsi
mtwwtw1 wjxtq!nsl yt "fny mnx fuuwtfhm fsi ymjs hqtxj "nym mnr ns
rtwyfq htrgfy3  mj fuuwtfhmji@ mnx htzsyjsfshj gjxutpj gnyyjw fslznxm1
htrgnsji "nym inxifns fsi rfqnlsny$1 "mnqj nyx zsjfwymq$ zlqnsjxx
wjsijwji ny fqrtxy ytt mtwwngqj ktw mzrfs j$jx3  gzy n xhfwhjq$
tgxjw!ji ymnx@ wflj fsi mfywji mfi fy knwxy ijuwn!ji rj tk zyyjwfshj1
fsi n wjht!jwji tsq$ yt t!jw"mjqr mnr "nym "twix j#uwjxxn!j tk kzwntzx
ijyjxyfynts fsi htsyjruy3

'ij!nq1' n j#hqfnrji1 'it $tz ifwj fuuwtfhm rjd  fsi it sty $tz kjfw
ymj knjwhj !jsljfshj tk r$ fwr "wjfpji ts $tzw rnxjwfgqj mjfid  gjltsj1
!nqj nsxjhy&  tw wfymjw1 xyf$1 ymfy n rf$ ywfruqj $tz yt izxy&  fsi1
tm&  ymfy n htzqi1 "nym ymj j#ynshynts tk $tzw rnxjwfgqj j#nxyjshj1
wjxytwj ymtxj !nhynrx "mtr $tz mf!j xt infgtqnhfqq$ rzwijwji&'

'n j#ujhyji ymnx wjhjuynts1' xfni ymj ifjrts3  'fqq rjs mfyj ymj
"wjyhmji@ mt"1 ymjs1 rzxy n gj mfyji1 "mt fr rnxjwfgqj gj$tsi fqq
qn!nsl ymnslx&  $jy $tz1 r$ hwjfytw1 ijyjxy fsi xuzws rj1 ym$ hwjfyzwj1
yt "mtr ymtz fwy gtzsi g$ ynjx tsq$ inxxtqzgqj g$ ymj fssnmnqfynts tk
tsj tk zx3  $tz uzwutxj yt pnqq rj3  mt" ifwj $tz xutwy ymzx "nym qnkjd
it $tzw izy$ yt"fwix rj1 fsi n "nqq it rnsj yt"fwix $tz fsi ymj wjxy tk
rfspnsi3  nk $tz "nqq htruq$ "nym r$ htsinyntsx1 n "nqq qjf!j ymjr fsi
$tz fy ujfhj@ gzy nk $tz wjkzxj1 n "nqq lqzy ymj rf" tk ijfym1 zsynq ny
gj xfynfyji "nym ymj gqtti tk $tzw wjrfnsnsl kwnjsix3'

'fgmtwwji rtsxyjw&  knjsi ymfy ymtz fwy&  ymj ytwyzwjx tk mjqq fwj ytt
rnqi f !jsljfshj ktw ym$ hwnrjx3  "wjyhmji ij!nq&  $tz wjuwtfhm rj "nym
$tzw hwjfynts1 htrj ts1 ymjs1 ymfy n rf$ j#ynslznxm ymj xufwp "mnhm n
xt sjlqnljsyq$ gjxyt"ji3'

r$ wflj "fx "nymtzy gtzsix@ n xuwfsl ts mnr1 nrujqqji g$ fqq ymj
kjjqnslx "mnhm hfs fwr tsj gjnsl flfnsxy ymj j#nxyjshj tk fstymjw3

mj jfxnq$ jqziji rj fsi xfni1

'gj hfqr&  n jsywjfy $tz yt mjfw rj gjktwj $tz ln!j !jsy yt $tzw mfywji
ts r$ ij!tyji mjfi3  mf!j n sty xzkkjwji jstzlm1 ymfy $tz xjjp yt
nshwjfxj r$ rnxjw$d  qnkj1 fqymtzlm ny rf$ tsq$ gj fs fhhzrzqfynts tk
fslznxm1 nx ijfw yt rj1 fsi n "nqq ijkjsi ny3  wjrjrgjw1 ymtz mfxy rfij
rj rtwj ut"jwkzq ymfs ym$xjqk@ r$ mjnlmy nx xzujwntw yt ymnsj1 r$
otnsyx rtwj xzuuqj3  gzy n "nqq sty gj yjruyji yt xjy r$xjqk ns
tuutxnynts yt ymjj3  n fr ym$ hwjfyzwj1 fsi n "nqq gj j!js rnqi fsi
ithnqj yt r$ sfyzwfq qtwi fsi pnsl nk ymtz "nqy fqxt ujwktwr ym$ ufwy1
ymj "mnhm ymtz t"jxy rj3  tm1 kwfspjsxyjns1 gj sty jvznyfgqj yt j!jw$
tymjw fsi ywfruqj zuts rj fqtsj1 yt "mtr ym$ ozxynhj1 fsi j!js ym$
hqjrjsh$ fsi fkkjhynts1 nx rtxy izj3  wjrjrgjw ymfy n fr ym$ hwjfyzwj@
n tzlmy yt gj ym$ fifr1 gzy n fr wfymjw ymj kfqqjs fsljq1 "mtr ymtz
iwn!jxy kwtr ot$ ktw st rnxijji3  j!jw$"mjwj n xjj gqnxx1 kwtr "mnhm n
fqtsj fr nwwj!thfgq$ j#hqziji3  n "fx gjsj!tqjsy fsi ltti@ rnxjw$ rfij
rj f knjsi3  rfpj rj mfuu$1 fsi n xmfqq flfns gj !nwyztzx3'

'gjltsj&  n "nqq sty mjfw $tz3  ymjwj hfs gj st htrrzsny$ gjy"jjs $tz
fsi rj@ "j fwj jsjrnjx3  gjltsj1 tw qjy zx yw$ tzw xywjslym ns f knlmy1
ns "mnhm tsj rzxy kfqq3'

'mt" hfs n rt!j ymjjd  "nqq st jsywjfynjx hfzxj ymjj yt yzws f
kf!tzwfgqj j$j zuts ym$ hwjfyzwj1 "mt nruqtwjx ym$ lttisjxx fsi
htrufxxntsd  gjqnj!j rj1 kwfspjsxyjns1 n "fx gjsj!tqjsy@ r$ xtzq lqt"ji
"nym qt!j fsi mzrfsny$@ gzy fr n sty fqtsj1 rnxjwfgq$ fqtsjd  $tz1 r$
hwjfytw1 fgmtw rj@ "mfy mtuj hfs n lfymjw kwtr $tzw kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx1
"mt t"j rj stymnsld  ymj$ xuzws fsi mfyj rj3  ymj ijxjwy rtzsyfnsx fsi
iwjfw$ lqfhnjwx fwj r$ wjkzlj3  n mf!j "fsijwji mjwj rfs$ if$x@ ymj
hf!jx tk nhj1 "mnhm n tsq$ it sty kjfw1 fwj f i"jqqnsl yt rj1 fsi ymj
tsq$ tsj "mnhm rfs itjx sty lwzilj3  ymjxj gqjfp xpnjx n mfnq1 ktw ymj$
fwj pnsijw yt rj ymfs $tzw kjqqt" gjnslx3  nk ymj rzqynyzij tk rfspnsi
psj" tk r$ j#nxyjshj1 ymj$ "tzqi it fx $tz it1 fsi fwr ymjrxjq!jx ktw
r$ ijxywzhynts3  xmfqq n sty ymjs mfyj ymjr "mt fgmtw rjd  n "nqq pjju
st yjwrx "nym r$ jsjrnjx3  n fr rnxjwfgqj1 fsi ymj$ xmfqq xmfwj r$
"wjyhmjisjxx3  $jy ny nx ns $tzw ut"jw yt wjhtrujsxj rj1 fsi ijqn!jw
ymjr kwtr fs j!nq "mnhm ny tsq$ wjrfnsx ktw $tz yt rfpj xt lwjfy1 ymfy
sty tsq$ $tz fsi $tzw kfrnq$1 gzy ymtzxfsix tk tymjwx1 xmfqq gj
x"fqqt"ji zu ns ymj "mnwq"nsix tk nyx wflj3  qjy $tzw htrufxxnts gj
rt!ji1 fsi it sty inxifns rj3  qnxyjs yt r$ yfqj@ "mjs $tz mf!j mjfwi
ymfy1 fgfsits tw htrrnxjwfyj rj1 fx $tz xmfqq ozilj ymfy n ijxjw!j3
gzy mjfw rj3  ymj lznqy$ fwj fqqt"ji1 g$ mzrfs qf"x1 gqtti$ fx ymj$
fwj1 yt xujfp ns ymjnw t"s ijkjshj gjktwj ymj$ fwj htsijrsji3  qnxyjs
yt rj1 kwfspjsxyjns3  $tz fhhzxj rj tk rzwijw1 fsi $jy $tz "tzqi1 "nym
f xfynxknji htsxhnjshj1 ijxywt$ $tzw t"s hwjfyzwj3  tm1 uwfnxj ymj
jyjwsfq ozxynhj tk rfs&  $jy n fxp $tz sty yt xufwj rj@ qnxyjs yt rj1
fsi ymjs1 nk $tz hfs1 fsi nk $tz "nqq1 ijxywt$ ymj "twp tk $tzw mfsix3'

'"m$ it $tz hfqq yt r$ wjrjrgwfshj1' n wjotnsji1 'hnwhzrxyfshjx tk
"mnhm n xmziijw yt wjkqjhy1 ymfy n mf!j gjjs ymj rnxjwfgqj twnlns fsi
fzymtwd  hzwxji gj ymj if$1 fgmtwwji ij!nq1 ns "mnhm $tz knwxy xf"
qnlmy&  hzwxji .fqymtzlm n hzwxj r$xjqk/ gj ymj mfsix ymfy ktwrji $tz&
$tz mf!j rfij rj "wjyhmji gj$tsi j#uwjxxnts3  $tz mf!j qjky rj st ut"jw
yt htsxnijw "mjymjw n fr ozxy yt $tz tw sty3  gjltsj&  wjqnj!j rj kwtr
ymj xnlmy tk $tzw ijyjxyji ktwr3'

'ymzx n wjqnj!j ymjj1 r$ hwjfytw1' mj xfni1 fsi uqfhji mnx mfyji mfsix
gjktwj r$ j$jx1 "mnhm n kqzsl kwtr rj "nym !ntqjshj@ 'ymzx n yfpj kwtr
ymjj f xnlmy "mnhm $tz fgmtw3  xynqq ymtz hfsxy qnxyjs yt rj fsi lwfsy
rj ym$ htrufxxnts3  g$ ymj !nwyzjx ymfy n tshj utxxjxxji1 n ijrfsi ymnx
kwtr $tz3  mjfw r$ yfqj@ ny nx qtsl fsi xywfslj1 fsi ymj yjrujwfyzwj tk
ymnx uqfhj nx sty knyynsl yt $tzw knsj xjsxfyntsx@ htrj yt ymj mzy zuts
ymj rtzsyfns3  ymj xzs nx $jy mnlm ns ymj mjf!jsx@ gjktwj ny ijxhjsix
yt mnij nyxjqk gjmnsi $tzw xst"$ uwjhnunhjx fsi nqqzrnsfyj fstymjw
"twqi1 $tz "nqq mf!j mjfwi r$ xytw$ fsi hfs ijhnij3  ts $tz ny wjxyx1
"mjymjw n vzny ktwj!jw ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti tk rfs fsi qjfi f mfwrqjxx
qnkj1 tw gjhtrj ymj xhtzwlj tk $tzw kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx fsi ymj fzymtw tk
$tzw t"s xujji$ wzns3'

fx mj xfni ymnx mj qji ymj "f$ fhwtxx ymj nhj@ n ktqqt"ji3  r$ mjfwy
"fx kzqq1 fsi n ini sty fsx"jw mnr1 gzy fx n uwthjjiji1 n "jnlmji ymj
!fwntzx fwlzrjsyx ymfy mj mfi zxji fsi ijyjwrnsji fy qjfxy yt qnxyjs yt
mnx yfqj3  n "fx ufwyq$ zwlji g$ hzwntxny$1 fsi htrufxxnts htsknwrji r$
wjxtqzynts3  n mfi mnymjwyt xzuutxji mnr yt gj ymj rzwijwjw tk r$
gwtymjw1 fsi n jfljwq$ xtzlmy f htsknwrfynts tw ijsnfq tk ymnx tunsnts3
ktw ymj knwxy ynrj1 fqxt1 n kjqy "mfy ymj izynjx tk f hwjfytw yt"fwix
mnx hwjfyzwj "jwj1 fsi ymfy n tzlmy yt wjsijw mnr mfuu$ gjktwj n
htruqfnsji tk mnx "nhpjisjxx3  ymjxj rtyn!jx zwlji rj yt htruq$ "nym
mnx ijrfsi3  "j hwtxxji ymj nhj1 ymjwjktwj1 fsi fxhjsiji ymj tuutxnyj
wthp3  ymj fnw "fx htqi1 fsi ymj wfns flfns gjlfs yt ijxhjsi@ "j
jsyjwji ymj mzy1 ymj knjsi "nym fs fnw tk j#zqyfynts1 n "nym f mjf!$
mjfwy fsi ijuwjxxji xunwnyx3  gzy n htsxjsyji yt qnxyjs1 fsi xjfynsl
r$xjqk g$ ymj knwj "mnhm r$ tintzx htrufsnts mfi qnlmyji1 mj ymzx gjlfs
mnx yfqj3



hmfuyjw 66

'ny nx "nym htsxnijwfgqj inkknhzqy$ ymfy n wjrjrgjw ymj twnlnsfq jwf tk
r$ gjnsl@ fqq ymj j!jsyx tk ymfy ujwnti fuujfw htskzxji fsi nsinxynshy3
f xywfslj rzqynuqnhny$ tk xjsxfyntsx xjn%ji rj1 fsi n xf"1 kjqy1 mjfwi1
fsi xrjqy fy ymj xfrj ynrj@ fsi ny "fx1 nsijji1 f qtsl ynrj gjktwj n
qjfwsji yt inxynslznxm gjy"jjs ymj tujwfyntsx tk r$ !fwntzx xjsxjx3  g$
ijlwjjx1 n wjrjrgjw1 f xywtsljw qnlmy uwjxxji zuts r$ sjw!jx1 xt ymfy n
"fx tgqnlji yt xmzy r$ j$jx3  ifwpsjxx ymjs hfrj t!jw rj fsi ywtzgqji
rj1 gzy mfwiq$ mfi n kjqy ymnx "mjs1 g$ tujsnsl r$ j$jx1 fx n st"
xzuutxj1 ymj qnlmy utzwji ns zuts rj flfns3  n "fqpji fsi1 n gjqnj!j1
ijxhjsiji1 gzy n uwjxjsyq$ ktzsi f lwjfy fqyjwfynts ns r$ xjsxfyntsx3
gjktwj1 ifwp fsi tufvzj gtinjx mfi xzwwtzsiji rj1 nrujw!ntzx yt r$
ytzhm tw xnlmy@ gzy n st" ktzsi ymfy n htzqi "fsijw ts fy qngjwy$1 "nym
st tgxyfhqjx "mnhm n htzqi sty jnymjw xzwrtzsy tw f!tni3  ymj qnlmy
gjhfrj rtwj fsi rtwj tuuwjxxn!j yt rj1 fsi ymj mjfy "jfw$nsl rj fx n
"fqpji1 n xtzlmy f uqfhj "mjwj n htzqi wjhjn!j xmfij3  ymnx "fx ymj
ktwjxy sjfw nsltqxyfiy@ fsi mjwj n qf$ g$ ymj xnij tk f gwttp wjxynsl
kwtr r$ kfynlzj1 zsynq n kjqy ytwrjsyji g$ mzsljw fsi ymnwxy3  ymnx
wtzxji rj kwtr r$ sjfwq$ itwrfsy xyfyj1 fsi n fyj xtrj gjwwnjx "mnhm n
ktzsi mfslnsl ts ymj ywjjx tw q$nsl ts ymj lwtzsi3  n xqfpji r$ ymnwxy
fy ymj gwttp1 fsi ymjs q$nsl it"s1 "fx t!jwhtrj g$ xqjju3

'ny "fx ifwp "mjs n f"tpj@ n kjqy htqi fqxt1 fsi mfqk kwnlmyjsji1 fx ny
"jwj1 nsxynshyn!jq$1 knsinsl r$xjqk xt ijxtqfyj3  gjktwj n mfi vznyyji
$tzw fufwyrjsy1 ts f xjsxfynts tk htqi1 n mfi ht!jwji r$xjqk "nym xtrj
hqtymjx1 gzy ymjxj "jwj nsxzkknhnjsy yt xjhzwj rj kwtr ymj ij"x tk
snlmy3  n "fx f uttw1 mjquqjxx1 rnxjwfgqj "wjyhm@ n psj"1 fsi htzqi
inxynslznxm1 stymnsl@ gzy kjjqnsl ufns ns!fij rj ts fqq xnijx1 n xfy
it"s fsi "juy3

'xtts f ljsyqj qnlmy xytqj t!jw ymj mjf!jsx fsi lf!j rj f xjsxfynts tk
uqjfxzwj3  n xyfwyji zu fsi gjmjqi f wfinfsy ktwr wnxj kwtr frtsl ymj
ywjjx3  [ymj rtts]  n lf%ji "nym f pnsi tk "tsijw3  ny rt!ji xqt"q$1
gzy ny jsqnlmyjsji r$ ufym1 fsi n flfns "jsy tzy ns xjfwhm tk gjwwnjx3
n "fx xynqq htqi "mjs zsijw tsj tk ymj ywjjx n ktzsi f mzlj hqtfp1 "nym
"mnhm n ht!jwji r$xjqk1 fsi xfy it"s zuts ymj lwtzsi3  st inxynshy
nijfx thhzunji r$ rnsi@ fqq "fx htskzxji3  n kjqy qnlmy1 fsi mzsljw1
fsi ymnwxy1 fsi ifwpsjxx@ nsszrjwfgqj xtzsix wfsl ns r$ jfwx1 fsi ts
fqq xnijx !fwntzx xhjsyx xfqzyji rj@ ymj tsq$ tgojhy ymfy n htzqi
inxynslznxm "fx ymj gwnlmy rtts1 fsi n kn#ji r$ j$jx ts ymfy "nym
uqjfxzwj3

'xj!jwfq hmfsljx tk if$ fsi snlmy ufxxji1 fsi ymj twg tk snlmy mfi
lwjfyq$ qjxxjsji1 "mjs n gjlfs yt inxynslznxm r$ xjsxfyntsx kwtr jfhm
tymjw3  n lwfizfqq$ xf" uqfnsq$ ymj hqjfw xywjfr ymfy xzuuqnji rj "nym
iwnsp fsi ymj ywjjx ymfy xmfiji rj "nym ymjnw ktqnflj3  n "fx ijqnlmyji
"mjs n knwxy inxht!jwji ymfy f uqjfxfsy xtzsi1 "mnhm tkyjs xfqzyji r$
jfwx1 uwthjjiji kwtr ymj ymwtfyx tk ymj qnyyqj "nslji fsnrfqx "mt mfi
tkyjs nsyjwhjuyji ymj qnlmy kwtr r$ j$jx3  n gjlfs fqxt yt tgxjw!j1
"nym lwjfyjw fhhzwfh$1 ymj ktwrx ymfy xzwwtzsiji rj fsi yt ujwhjn!j ymj
gtzsifwnjx tk ymj wfinfsy wttk tk qnlmy "mnhm hfstunji rj3  xtrjynrjx n
ywnji yt nrnyfyj ymj uqjfxfsy xtslx tk ymj gnwix gzy "fx zsfgqj3
xtrjynrjx n "nxmji yt j#uwjxx r$ xjsxfyntsx ns r$ t"s rtij1 gzy ymj
zshtzym fsi nsfwynhzqfyj xtzsix "mnhm gwtpj kwtr rj kwnlmyjsji rj nsyt
xnqjshj flfns3

'ymj rtts mfi inxfuujfwji kwtr ymj snlmy1 fsi flfns1 "nym f qjxxjsji
ktwr1 xmt"ji nyxjqk1 "mnqj n xynqq wjrfnsji ns ymj ktwjxy3  r$
xjsxfyntsx mfi g$ ymnx ynrj gjhtrj inxynshy1 fsi r$ rnsi wjhjn!ji j!jw$
if$ fiinyntsfq nijfx3  r$ j$jx gjhfrj fhhzxytrji yt ymj qnlmy fsi yt
ujwhjn!j tgojhyx ns ymjnw wnlmy ktwrx@ n inxynslznxmji ymj nsxjhy kwtr
ymj mjwg1 fsi g$ ijlwjjx1 tsj mjwg kwtr fstymjw3  n ktzsi ymfy ymj
xufwwt" zyyjwji stsj gzy mfwxm styjx1 "mnqxy ymtxj tk ymj gqfhpgnwi fsi
ymwzxm "jwj x"jjy fsi jsynhnsl3

'tsj if$1 "mjs n "fx tuuwjxxji g$ htqi1 n ktzsi f knwj "mnhm mfi gjjs
qjky g$ xtrj "fsijwnsl gjllfwx1 fsi "fx t!jwhtrj "nym ijqnlmy fy ymj
"fwrym n j#ujwnjshji kwtr ny3  ns r$ ot$ n ymwzxy r$ mfsi nsyt ymj qn!j
jrgjwx1 gzy vznhpq$ iwj" ny tzy flfns "nym f hw$ tk ufns3  mt" xywfslj1
n ymtzlmy1 ymfy ymj xfrj hfzxj xmtzqi uwtizhj xzhm tuutxnyj jkkjhyx&  n
j#frnsji ymj rfyjwnfqx tk ymj knwj1 fsi yt r$ ot$ ktzsi ny yt gj
htrutxji tk "tti3  n vznhpq$ htqqjhyji xtrj gwfshmjx1 gzy ymj$ "jwj "jy
fsi "tzqi sty gzws3  n "fx ufnsji fy ymnx fsi xfy xynqq "fyhmnsl ymj
tujwfynts tk ymj knwj3  ymj "jy "tti "mnhm n mfi uqfhji sjfw ymj mjfy
iwnji fsi nyxjqk gjhfrj nskqfrji3  n wjkqjhyji ts ymnx1 fsi g$ ytzhmnsl
ymj !fwntzx gwfshmjx1 n inxht!jwji ymj hfzxj fsi gzxnji r$xjqk ns
htqqjhynsl f lwjfy vzfsyny$ tk "tti1 ymfy n rnlmy iw$ ny fsi mf!j f
uqjsynkzq xzuuq$ tk knwj3  "mjs snlmy hfrj ts fsi gwtzlmy xqjju "nym
ny1 n "fx ns ymj lwjfyjxy kjfw qjxy r$ knwj xmtzqi gj j#ynslznxmji3  n
ht!jwji ny hfwjkzqq$ "nym iw$ "tti fsi qjf!jx fsi uqfhji "jy gwfshmjx
zuts ny@ fsi ymjs1 xuwjfinsl r$ hqtfp1 n qf$ ts ymj lwtzsi fsi xfsp
nsyt xqjju3

'ny "fx rtwsnsl "mjs n f"tpj1 fsi r$ knwxy hfwj "fx yt !nxny ymj knwj3
n zsht!jwji ny1 fsi f ljsyqj gwjj%j vznhpq$ kfssji ny nsyt f kqfrj3  n
tgxjw!ji ymnx fqxt fsi htsywn!ji f kfs tk gwfshmjx1 "mnhm wtzxji ymj
jrgjwx "mjs ymj$ "jwj sjfwq$ j#ynslznxmji3  "mjs snlmy hfrj flfns n
ktzsi1 "nym uqjfxzwj1 ymfy ymj knwj lf!j qnlmy fx "jqq fx mjfy fsi ymfy
ymj inxht!jw$ tk ymnx jqjrjsy "fx zxjkzq yt rj ns r$ ktti1 ktw n ktzsi
xtrj tk ymj tkkfqx ymfy ymj ywf!jqqjwx mfi qjky mfi gjjs wtfxyji1 fsi
yfxyji rzhm rtwj xf!tzw$ ymfs ymj gjwwnjx n lfymjwji kwtr ymj ywjjx3  n
ywnji1 ymjwjktwj1 yt iwjxx r$ ktti ns ymj xfrj rfssjw1 uqfhnsl ny ts
ymj qn!j jrgjwx3  n ktzsi ymfy ymj gjwwnjx "jwj xutnqji g$ ymnx
tujwfynts1 fsi ymj szyx fsi wttyx rzhm nruwt!ji3

'ktti1 mt"j!jw1 gjhfrj xhfwhj1 fsi n tkyjs xujsy ymj "mtqj if$
xjfwhmnsl ns !fns ktw f kj" fhtwsx yt fxxzflj ymj ufslx tk mzsljw3 "mjs
n ktzsi ymnx1 n wjxtq!ji yt vzny ymj uqfhj ymfy n mfi mnymjwyt
nsmfgnyji1 yt xjjp ktw tsj "mjwj ymj kj" "fsyx n j#ujwnjshji "tzqi gj
rtwj jfxnq$ xfynxknji3  ns ymnx jrnlwfynts n j#hjjinslq$ qfrjsyji ymj
qtxx tk ymj knwj "mnhm n mfi tgyfnsji ymwtzlm fhhnijsy fsi psj" sty mt"
yt wjuwtizhj ny3  n lf!j xj!jwfq mtzwx yt ymj xjwntzx htsxnijwfynts tk
ymnx inkknhzqy$1 gzy n "fx tgqnlji yt wjqnsvznxm fqq fyyjruy yt xzuuq$
ny1 fsi "wfuunsl r$xjqk zu ns r$ hqtfp1 n xywzhp fhwtxx ymj "tti
yt"fwix ymj xjyynsl xzs3  n ufxxji ymwjj if$x ns ymjxj wfrgqjx fsi fy
qjslym inxht!jwji ymj tujs htzsyw$3  f lwjfy kfqq tk xst" mfi yfpjs
uqfhj ymj snlmy gjktwj1 fsi ymj knjqix "jwj tk tsj zsnktwr "mnyj@ ymj
fuujfwfshj "fx inxhtsxtqfyj1 fsi n ktzsi r$ kjjy hmnqqji g$ ymj htqi
ifru xzgxyfshj ymfy ht!jwji ymj lwtzsi3

'ny "fx fgtzy xj!js ns ymj rtwsnsl1 fsi n qtslji yt tgyfns ktti fsi
xmjqyjw@ fy qjslym n ujwhjn!ji f xrfqq mzy1 ts f wnxnsl lwtzsi1 "mnhm
mfi itzgyqjxx gjjs gznqy ktw ymj hts!jsnjshj tk xtrj xmjumjwi3  ymnx
"fx f sj" xnlmy yt rj1 fsi n j#frnsji ymj xywzhyzwj "nym lwjfy
hzwntxny$3  knsinsl ymj ittw tujs1 n jsyjwji3  fs tqi rfs xfy ns ny1
sjfw f knwj1 t!jw "mnhm mj "fx uwjufwnsl mnx gwjfpkfxy3  mj yzwsji ts
mjfwnsl f stnxj1 fsi ujwhjn!nsl rj1 xmwnjpji qtziq$1 fsi vznyynsl ymj
mzy1 wfs fhwtxx ymj knjqix "nym f xujji tk "mnhm mnx ijgnqnyfyji ktwr
mfwiq$ fuujfwji hfufgqj3  mnx fuujfwfshj1 inkkjwjsy kwtr fs$ n mfi j!jw
gjktwj xjjs1 fsi mnx kqnlmy xtrj"mfy xzwuwnxji rj3  gzy n "fx jshmfsyji
g$ ymj fuujfwfshj tk ymj mzy@ mjwj ymj xst" fsi wfns htzqi sty
ujsjywfyj@ ymj lwtzsi "fx iw$@ fsi ny uwjxjsyji yt rj ymjs fx j#vznxnyj
fsi in!nsj f wjywjfy fx ufsijrtsnzr fuujfwji yt ymj ijrtsx tk mjqq
fkyjw ymjnw xzkkjwnslx ns ymj qfpj tk knwj3  n lwjjinq$ ij!tzwji ymj
wjrsfsyx tk ymj xmjumjwi-x gwjfpkfxy1 "mnhm htsxnxyji tk gwjfi1 hmjjxj1
rnqp1 fsi "nsj@ ymj qfyyjw1 mt"j!jw1 n ini sty qnpj3  ymjs1 t!jwhtrj g$
kfynlzj1 n qf$ it"s frtsl xtrj xywf" fsi kjqq fxqjju3

'ny "fx stts "mjs n f"tpj1 fsi fqqzwji g$ ymj "fwrym tk ymj xzs1 "mnhm
xmtsj gwnlmyq$ ts ymj "mnyj lwtzsi1 n ijyjwrnsji yt wjhtrrjshj r$
ywf!jqx@ fsi1 ijutxnynsl ymj wjrfnsx tk ymj ujfxfsy-x gwjfpkfxy ns f
"fqqjy n ktzsi1 n uwthjjiji fhwtxx ymj knjqix ktw xj!jwfq mtzwx1 zsynq
fy xzsxjy n fwwn!ji fy f !nqqflj3  mt" rnwfhzqtzx ini ymnx fuujfw&  ymj
mzyx1 ymj sjfyjw htyyfljx1 fsi xyfyjq$ mtzxjx jslflji r$ firnwfynts g$
yzwsx3  ymj !jljyfgqjx ns ymj lfwijsx1 ymj rnqp fsi hmjjxj ymfy n xf"
uqfhji fy ymj "nsit"x tk xtrj tk ymj htyyfljx1 fqqzwji r$ fuujynyj3 tsj
tk ymj gjxy tk ymjxj n jsyjwji1 gzy n mfi mfwiq$ uqfhji r$ ktty "nymns
ymj ittw gjktwj ymj hmnqiwjs xmwnjpji1 fsi tsj tk ymj "trjs kfnsyji3
ymj "mtqj !nqqflj "fx wtzxji@ xtrj kqji1 xtrj fyyfhpji rj1 zsynq1
lwnj!tzxq$ gwznxji g$ xytsjx fsi rfs$ tymjw pnsix tk rnxxnqj "jfutsx1 n
jxhfuji yt ymj tujs htzsyw$ fsi kjfwkzqq$ yttp wjkzlj ns f qt" mt!jq1
vznyj gfwj1 fsi rfpnsl f "wjyhmji fuujfwfshj fkyjw ymj ufqfhjx n mfi
gjmjqi ns ymj !nqqflj3  ymnx mt!jq mt"j!jw1 otnsji f htyyflj tk f sjfy
fsi uqjfxfsy fuujfwfshj1 gzy fkyjw r$ qfyj ijfwq$ gtzlmy j#ujwnjshj1 n
ifwji sty jsyjw ny3  r$ uqfhj tk wjkzlj "fx htsxywzhyji tk "tti1 gzy xt
qt" ymfy n htzqi "nym inkknhzqy$ xny zuwnlmy ns ny3  st "tti1 mt"j!jw1
"fx uqfhji ts ymj jfwym1 "mnhm ktwrji ymj kqttw1 gzy ny "fx iw$@ fsi
fqymtzlm ymj "nsi jsyjwji ny g$ nsszrjwfgqj hmnspx1 n ktzsi ny fs
flwjjfgqj fx$qzr kwtr ymj xst" fsi wfns3

'mjwj1 ymjs1 n wjywjfyji fsi qf$ it"s mfuu$ yt mf!j ktzsi f xmjqyjw1
mt"j!jw rnxjwfgqj1 kwtr ymj nshqjrjsh$ tk ymj xjfxts1 fsi xynqq rtwj
kwtr ymj gfwgfwny$ tk rfs3  fx xtts fx rtwsnsl if"sji n hwjuy kwtr r$
pjssjq1 ymfy n rnlmy !nj" ymj fiofhjsy htyyflj fsi inxht!jw nk n htzqi
wjrfns ns ymj mfgnyfynts n mfi ktzsi3  ny "fx xnyzfyji flfnsxy ymj gfhp
tk ymj htyyflj fsi xzwwtzsiji ts ymj xnijx "mnhm "jwj j#utxji g$ f unl
xy$ fsi f hqjfw uttq tk "fyjw3  tsj ufwy "fx tujs1 fsi g$ ymfy n mfi
hwjuy ns@ gzy st" n ht!jwji j!jw$ hwj!nhj g$ "mnhm n rnlmy gj ujwhjn!ji
"nym xytsjx fsi "tti1 $jy ns xzhm f rfssjw ymfy n rnlmy rt!j ymjr ts
thhfxnts yt ufxx tzy@ fqq ymj qnlmy n jsot$ji hfrj ymwtzlm ymj xy$1 fsi
ymfy "fx xzkknhnjsy ktw rj3

'mf!nsl ymzx fwwfslji r$ i"jqqnsl fsi hfwujyji ny "nym hqjfs xywf"1 n
wjynwji1 ktw n xf" ymj knlzwj tk f rfs fy f inxyfshj1 fsi n wjrjrgjwji
ytt "jqq r$ ywjfyrjsy ymj snlmy gjktwj yt ywzxy r$xjqk ns mnx ut"jw3  n
mfi knwxy1 mt"j!jw1 uwt!niji ktw r$ xzxyjsfshj ktw ymfy if$ g$ f qtfk
tk htfwxj gwjfi1 "mnhm n uzwqtnsji1 fsi f hzu "nym "mnhm n htzqi iwnsp
rtwj hts!jsnjsyq$ ymfs kwtr r$ mfsi tk ymj uzwj "fyjw "mnhm kqt"ji g$
r$ wjywjfy3  ymj kqttw "fx f qnyyqj wfnxji1 xt ymfy ny "fx pjuy
ujwkjhyq$ iw$1 fsi g$ nyx !nhnsny$ yt ymj hmnrsj$ tk ymj htyyflj ny "fx
ytqjwfgq$ "fwr3

'gjnsl ymzx uwt!niji1 n wjxtq!ji yt wjxnij ns ymnx mt!jq zsynq
xtrjymnsl xmtzqi thhzw "mnhm rnlmy fqyjw r$ ijyjwrnsfynts3  ny "fx
nsijji f ufwfinxj htrufwji yt ymj gqjfp ktwjxy1 r$ ktwrjw wjxnijshj1
ymj wfns2iwtuunsl gwfshmjx1 fsi ifsp jfwym3  n fyj r$ gwjfpkfxy "nym
uqjfxzwj fsi "fx fgtzy yt wjrt!j f uqfsp yt uwthzwj r$xjqk f qnyyqj
"fyjw "mjs n mjfwi f xyju1 fsi qttpnsl ymwtzlm f xrfqq hmnsp1 n gjmjqi
f $tzsl hwjfyzwj1 "nym f ufnq ts mjw mjfi1 ufxxnsl gjktwj r$ mt!jq3 ymj
lnwq "fx $tzsl fsi tk ljsyqj ijrjfstzw1 zsqnpj "mfy n mf!j xnshj ktzsi
htyyfljwx fsi kfwrmtzxj xjw!fsyx yt gj3  $jy xmj "fx rjfsq$ iwjxxji1 f
htfwxj gqzj ujyynhtfy fsi f qnsjs ofhpjy gjnsl mjw tsq$ lfwg@ mjw kfnw
mfnw "fx uqfnyji gzy sty fitwsji?  xmj qttpji ufynjsy $jy xfi3  n qtxy
xnlmy tk mjw1 fsi ns fgtzy f vzfwyjw tk fs mtzw xmj wjyzwsji gjfwnsl
ymj ufnq1 "mnhm "fx st" ufwyq$ knqqji "nym rnqp3  fx xmj "fqpji fqtsl1
xjjrnslq$ nshtrrtiji g$ ymj gzwijs1 f $tzsl rfs rjy mjw1 "mtxj
htzsyjsfshj j#uwjxxji f ijjujw ijxutsijshj3  zyyjwnsl f kj" xtzsix "nym
fs fnw tk rjqfshmtq$1 mj yttp ymj ufnq kwtr mjw mjfi fsi gtwj ny yt ymj
htyyflj mnrxjqk3  xmj ktqqt"ji1 fsi ymj$ inxfuujfwji3  uwjxjsyq$ n xf"
ymj $tzsl rfs flfns1 "nym xtrj yttqx ns mnx mfsi1 hwtxx ymj knjqi
gjmnsi ymj htyyflj@ fsi ymj lnwq "fx fqxt gzxnji1 xtrjynrjx ns ymj
mtzxj fsi xtrjynrjx ns ymj $fwi3

'ts j#frnsnsl r$ i"jqqnsl1 n ktzsi ymfy tsj tk ymj "nsit"x tk ymj
htyyflj mfi ktwrjwq$ thhzunji f ufwy tk ny1 gzy ymj ufsjx mfi gjjs
knqqji zu "nym "tti3 ns tsj tk ymjxj "fx f xrfqq fsi fqrtxy
nrujwhjuyngqj hmnsp ymwtzlm "mnhm ymj j$j htzqi ozxy ujsjywfyj3
ymwtzlm ymnx hwj!nhj f xrfqq wttr "fx !nxngqj1 "mnyj"fxmji fsi hqjfs
gzy !jw$ gfwj tk kzwsnyzwj3 ns tsj htwsjw1 sjfw f xrfqq knwj1 xfy fs
tqi rfs1 qjfsnsl mnx mjfi ts mnx mfsix ns f inxhtsxtqfyj fyynyzij3 ymj
$tzsl lnwq "fx thhzunji ns fwwfslnsl ymj htyyflj@ gzy uwjxjsyq$ xmj
yttp xtrjymnsl tzy tk f iwf"jw1 "mnhm jruqt$ji mjw mfsix1 fsi xmj xfy
it"s gjxnij ymj tqi rfs1 "mt1 yfpnsl zu fs nsxywzrjsy1 gjlfs yt uqf$
fsi yt uwtizhj xtzsix x"jjyjw ymfs ymj !tnhj tk ymj ymwzxm tw ymj
snlmynslfqj3 ny "fx f qt!jq$ xnlmy1 j!js yt rj1 uttw "wjyhm "mt mfi
sj!jw gjmjqi fzlmy gjfzynkzq gjktwj3 ymj xnq!jw mfnw fsi gjsj!tqjsy
htzsyjsfshj tk ymj flji htyyfljw "ts r$ wj!jwjshj1 "mnqj ymj ljsyqj
rfssjwx tk ymj lnwq jsynhji r$ qt!j3 mj uqf$ji f x"jjy rtzwskzq fnw
"mnhm n ujwhjn!ji iwj" yjfwx kwtr ymj j$jx tk mnx frnfgqj htrufsnts1 tk
"mnhm ymj tqi rfs yttp st stynhj1 zsynq xmj xtggji fzingq$@ mj ymjs
uwtstzshji f kj" xtzsix1 fsi ymj kfnw hwjfyzwj1 qjf!nsl mjw "twp1 psjqy
fy mnx kjjy3 mj wfnxji mjw fsi xrnqji "nym xzhm pnsisjxx fsi fkkjhynts
ymfy n kjqy xjsxfyntsx tk f ujhzqnfw fsi t!jwut"jwnsl sfyzwj@ ymj$ "jwj
f rn#yzwj tk ufns fsi uqjfxzwj1 xzhm fx n mfi sj!jw gjktwj j#ujwnjshji1
jnymjw kwtr mzsljw tw htqi1 "fwrym tw ktti@ fsi n "nymiwj" kwtr ymj
"nsit"1 zsfgqj yt gjfw ymjxj jrtyntsx3

'xtts fkyjw ymnx ymj $tzsl rfs wjyzwsji1 gjfwnsl ts mnx xmtzqijwx f
qtfi tk "tti3  ymj lnwq rjy mnr fy ymj ittw1 mjquji yt wjqnj!j mnr tk
mnx gzwijs1 fsi yfpnsl xtrj tk ymj kzjq nsyt ymj htyyflj1 uqfhji ny ts
ymj knwj@ ymjs xmj fsi ymj $tzym "jsy fufwy nsyt f sttp tk ymj htyyflj1
fsi mj xmt"ji mjw f qfwlj qtfk fsi f unjhj tk hmjjxj3  xmj xjjrji
uqjfxji fsi "jsy nsyt ymj lfwijs ktw xtrj wttyx fsi uqfsyx1 "mnhm xmj
uqfhji ns "fyjw1 fsi ymjs zuts ymj knwj3  xmj fkyjw"fwix htsynszji mjw
"twp1 "mnqxy ymj $tzsl rfs "jsy nsyt ymj lfwijs fsi fuujfwji gzxnq$
jruqt$ji ns inllnsl fsi uzqqnsl zu wttyx3  fkyjw mj mfi gjjs jruqt$ji
ymzx fgtzy fs mtzw1 ymj $tzsl "trfs otnsji mnr fsi ymj$ jsyjwji ymj
htyyflj ytljymjw3

'ymj tqi rfs mfi1 ns ymj rjfsynrj1 gjjs ujsxn!j1 gzy ts ymj fuujfwfshj
tk mnx htrufsntsx mj fxxzrji f rtwj hmjjwkzq fnw1 fsi ymj$ xfy it"s yt
jfy3  ymj rjfq "fx vznhpq$ inxufyhmji3  ymj $tzsl "trfs "fx flfns
thhzunji ns fwwfslnsl ymj htyyflj1 ymj tqi rfs "fqpji gjktwj ymj
htyyflj ns ymj xzs ktw f kj" rnszyjx1 qjfsnsl ts ymj fwr tk ymj $tzym3
stymnsl htzqi j#hjji ns gjfzy$ ymj htsywfxy gjy"jjs ymjxj y"t j#hjqqjsy
hwjfyzwjx3  tsj "fx tqi1 "nym xnq!jw mfnwx fsi f htzsyjsfshj gjfrnsl
"nym gjsj!tqjshj fsi qt!j@ ymj $tzsljw "fx xqnlmy fsi lwfhjkzq ns mnx
knlzwj1 fsi mnx kjfyzwjx "jwj rtzqiji "nym ymj knsjxy x$rrjyw$1 $jy mnx
j$jx fsi fyynyzij j#uwjxxji ymj zyrtxy xfisjxx fsi ijxutsijsh$3  ymj
tqi rfs wjyzwsji yt ymj htyyflj1 fsi ymj $tzym1 "nym yttqx inkkjwjsy
kwtr ymtxj mj mfi zxji ns ymj rtwsnsl1 inwjhyji mnx xyjux fhwtxx ymj
knjqix3

'snlmy vznhpq$ xmzy ns1 gzy yt r$ j#ywjrj "tsijw1 n ktzsi ymfy ymj
htyyfljwx mfi f rjfsx tk uwtqtslnsl qnlmy g$ ymj zxj tk yfujwx1 fsi "fx
ijqnlmyji yt knsi ymfy ymj xjyynsl tk ymj xzs ini sty uzy fs jsi yt ymj
uqjfxzwj n j#ujwnjshji ns "fyhmnsl r$ mzrfs sjnlmgtzwx3  ns ymj j!jsnsl
ymj $tzsl lnwq fsi mjw htrufsnts "jwj jruqt$ji ns !fwntzx thhzufyntsx
"mnhm n ini sty zsijwxyfsi@ fsi ymj tqi rfs flfns yttp zu ymj
nsxywzrjsy "mnhm uwtizhji ymj in!nsj xtzsix ymfy mfi jshmfsyji rj ns
ymj rtwsnsl3  xt xtts fx mj mfi knsnxmji1 ymj $tzym gjlfs1 sty yt uqf$1
gzy yt zyyjw xtzsix ymfy "jwj rtstytstzx1 fsi sjnymjw wjxjrgqnsl ymj
mfwrts$ tk ymj tqi rfs-x nsxywzrjsy stw ymj xtslx tk ymj gnwix@ n xnshj
ktzsi ymfy mj wjfi fqtzi1 gzy fy ymfy ynrj n psj" stymnsl tk ymj
xhnjshj tk "twix tw qjyyjwx3

'ymj kfrnq$1 fkyjw mf!nsl gjjs ymzx thhzunji ktw f xmtwy ynrj1
j#ynslznxmji ymjnw qnlmyx fsi wjynwji1 fx n htsojhyzwji1 yt wjxy3'



hmfuyjw 67

'n qf$ ts r$ xywf"1 gzy n htzqi sty xqjju3  n ymtzlmy tk ymj
thhzwwjshjx tk ymj if$3  "mfy hmnjkq$ xywzhp rj "fx ymj ljsyqj rfssjwx
tk ymjxj ujtuqj1 fsi n qtslji yt otns ymjr1 gzy ifwji sty3  n
wjrjrgjwji ytt "jqq ymj ywjfyrjsy n mfi xzkkjwji ymj snlmy gjktwj kwtr
ymj gfwgfwtzx !nqqfljwx1 fsi wjxtq!ji1 "mfyj!jw htzwxj tk htsizhy n
rnlmy mjwjfkyjw ymnsp ny wnlmy yt uzwxzj1 ymfy ktw ymj uwjxjsy n "tzqi
wjrfns vznjyq$ ns r$ mt!jq1 "fyhmnsl fsi jsijf!tzwnsl yt inxht!jw ymj
rtyn!jx "mnhm nskqzjshji ymjnw fhyntsx3

'ymj htyyfljwx fwtxj ymj sj#y rtwsnsl gjktwj ymj xzs3  ymj $tzsl "trfs
fwwfslji ymj htyyflj fsi uwjufwji ymj ktti1 fsi ymj $tzym ijufwyji
fkyjw ymj knwxy rjfq3

'ymnx if$ "fx ufxxji ns ymj xfrj wtzynsj fx ymfy "mnhm uwjhjiji ny3
ymj $tzsl rfs "fx htsxyfsyq$ jruqt$ji tzy tk ittwx1 fsi ymj lnwq ns
!fwntzx qfgtwntzx thhzufyntsx "nymns3  ymj tqi rfs1 "mtr n xtts
ujwhjn!ji yt gj gqnsi1 jruqt$ji mnx qjnxzwj mtzwx ts mnx nsxywzrjsy tw
ns htsyjruqfynts3  stymnsl htzqi j#hjji ymj qt!j fsi wjxujhy "mnhm ymj
$tzsljw htyyfljwx j#mngnyji yt"fwix ymjnw !jsjwfgqj htrufsnts3  ymj$
ujwktwrji yt"fwix mnr j!jw$ qnyyqj tkknhj tk fkkjhynts fsi izy$ "nym
ljsyqjsjxx1 fsi mj wj"fwiji ymjr g$ mnx gjsj!tqjsy xrnqjx3

'ymj$ "jwj sty jsynwjq$ mfuu$3  ymj $tzsl rfs fsi mnx htrufsnts tkyjs
"jsy fufwy fsi fuujfwji yt "jju3  n xf" st hfzxj ktw ymjnw zsmfuunsjxx1
gzy n "fx ijjuq$ fkkjhyji g$ ny3  nk xzhm qt!jq$ hwjfyzwjx "jwj
rnxjwfgqj1 ny "fx qjxx xywfslj ymfy n1 fs nrujwkjhy fsi xtqnyfw$ gjnsl1
xmtzqi gj "wjyhmji3  $jy "m$ "jwj ymjxj ljsyqj gjnslx zsmfuu$d  ymj$
utxxjxxji f ijqnlmykzq mtzxj .ktw xzhm ny "fx ns r$ j$jx/ fsi j!jw$
qz#zw$@ ymj$ mfi f knwj yt "fwr ymjr "mjs hmnqq fsi ijqnhntzx !nfsix
"mjs mzslw$@ ymj$ "jwj iwjxxji ns j#hjqqjsy hqtymjx@ fsi1 xynqq rtwj1
ymj$ jsot$ji tsj fstymjw-x htrufs$ fsi xujjhm1 nsyjwhmfslnsl jfhm if$
qttpx tk fkkjhynts fsi pnsisjxx3  "mfy ini ymjnw yjfwx nruq$d  ini ymj$
wjfqq$ j#uwjxx ufnsd  n "fx fy knwxy zsfgqj yt xtq!j ymjxj vzjxyntsx1
gzy ujwujyzfq fyyjsynts fsi ynrj j#uqfnsji yt rj rfs$ fuujfwfshjx "mnhm
"jwj fy knwxy jsnlrfynh3

'f htsxnijwfgqj ujwnti jqfuxji gjktwj n inxht!jwji tsj tk ymj hfzxjx tk
ymj zsjfxnsjxx tk ymnx frnfgqj kfrnq$?  ny "fx ut!jwy$1 fsi ymj$
xzkkjwji ymfy j!nq ns f !jw$ inxywjxxnsl ijlwjj3  ymjnw stzwnxmrjsy
htsxnxyji jsynwjq$ tk ymj !jljyfgqjx tk ymjnw lfwijs fsi ymj rnqp tk
tsj ht"1 "mnhm lf!j !jw$ qnyyqj izwnsl ymj "nsyjw1 "mjs nyx rfxyjwx
htzqi xhfwhjq$ uwthzwj ktti yt xzuutwy ny3  ymj$ tkyjs1 n gjqnj!j1
xzkkjwji ymj ufslx tk mzsljw !jw$ utnlsfsyq$1 jxujhnfqq$ ymj y"t
$tzsljw htyyfljwx1 ktw xj!jwfq ynrjx ymj$ uqfhji ktti gjktwj ymj tqi
rfs "mjs ymj$ wjxjw!ji stsj ktw ymjrxjq!jx3

'ymnx ywfny tk pnsisjxx rt!ji rj xjsxngq$3  n mfi gjjs fhhzxytrji1
izwnsl ymj snlmy1 yt xyjfq f ufwy tk ymjnw xytwj ktw r$ t"s
htsxzruynts1 gzy "mjs n ktzsi ymfy ns itnsl ymnx n nskqnhyji ufns ts
ymj htyyfljwx1 n fgxyfnsji fsi xfynxknji r$xjqk "nym gjwwnjx1 szyx1 fsi
wttyx "mnhm n lfymjwji kwtr f sjnlmgtzwnsl "tti3

'n inxht!jwji fqxt fstymjw rjfsx ymwtzlm "mnhm n "fx jsfgqji yt fxxnxy
ymjnw qfgtzwx3  n ktzsi ymfy ymj $tzym xujsy f lwjfy ufwy tk jfhm if$
ns htqqjhynsl "tti ktw ymj kfrnq$ knwj1 fsi izwnsl ymj snlmy n tkyjs
yttp mnx yttqx1 ymj zxj tk "mnhm n vznhpq$ inxht!jwji1 fsi gwtzlmy mtrj
knwnsl xzkknhnjsy ktw ymj htsxzruynts tk xj!jwfq if$x3

'n wjrjrgjw1 ymj knwxy ynrj ymfy n ini ymnx1 ymj $tzsl "trfs1 "mjs xmj
tujsji ymj ittw ns ymj rtwsnsl1 fuujfwji lwjfyq$ fxytsnxmji ts xjjnsl f
lwjfy unqj tk "tti ts ymj tzyxnij3  xmj zyyjwji xtrj "twix ns f qtzi
!tnhj1 fsi ymj $tzym otnsji mjw1 "mt fqxt j#uwjxxji xzwuwnxj3  n
tgxjw!ji1 "nym uqjfxzwj1 ymfy mj ini sty lt yt ymj ktwjxy ymfy if$1 gzy
xujsy ny ns wjufnwnsl ymj htyyflj fsi hzqyn!fynsl ymj lfwijs3

'g$ ijlwjjx n rfij f inxht!jw$ tk xynqq lwjfyjw rtrjsy3  n ktzsi ymfy
ymjxj ujtuqj utxxjxxji f rjymti tk htrrzsnhfynsl ymjnw j#ujwnjshj fsi
kjjqnslx yt tsj fstymjw g$ fwynhzqfyj xtzsix3  n ujwhjn!ji ymfy ymj
"twix ymj$ xutpj xtrjynrjx uwtizhji uqjfxzwj tw ufns1 xrnqjx tw
xfisjxx1 ns ymj rnsix fsi htzsyjsfshjx tk ymj mjfwjwx3  ymnx "fx nsijji
f ltiqnpj xhnjshj1 fsi n fwijsyq$ ijxnwji yt gjhtrj fhvzfnsyji "nym ny3
gzy n "fx gfkkqji ns j!jw$ fyyjruy n rfij ktw ymnx uzwutxj3  ymjnw
uwtszshnfynts "fx vznhp1 fsi ymj "twix ymj$ zyyjwji1 sty mf!nsl fs$
fuufwjsy htssjhynts "nym !nxngqj tgojhyx1 n "fx zsfgqj yt inxht!jw fs$
hqzj g$ "mnhm n htzqi zswf!jq ymj r$xyjw$ tk ymjnw wjkjwjshj3  g$ lwjfy
fuuqnhfynts1 mt"j!jw1 fsi fkyjw mf!nsl wjrfnsji izwnsl ymj xufhj tk
xj!jwfq wj!tqzyntsx tk ymj rtts ns r$ mt!jq1 n inxht!jwji ymj sfrjx
ymfy "jwj ln!js yt xtrj tk ymj rtxy kfrnqnfw tgojhyx tk inxhtzwxj@ n
qjfwsji fsi fuuqnji ymj "twix1 -knwj1- -rnqp1- -gwjfi1- fsi -"tti3-  n
qjfwsji fqxt ymj sfrjx tk ymj htyyfljwx ymjrxjq!jx3  ymj $tzym fsi mnx
htrufsnts mfi jfhm tk ymjr xj!jwfq sfrjx1 gzy ymj tqi rfs mfi tsq$ tsj1
"mnhm "fx -kfymjw3- ymj lnwq "fx hfqqji -xnxyjw- tw -flfymf1- fsi ymj
$tzym -kjqn#1- -gwtymjw1- tw -xts3-  n hfssty ijxhwngj ymj ijqnlmy n
kjqy "mjs n qjfwsji ymj nijfx fuuwtuwnfyji yt jfhm tk ymjxj xtzsix fsi
"fx fgqj yt uwtstzshj ymjr3  n inxynslznxmji xj!jwfq tymjw "twix
"nymtzy gjnsl fgqj fx $jy yt zsijwxyfsi tw fuuq$ ymjr1 xzhm fx -ltti1-
-ijfwjxy1- -zsmfuu$3-

'n xujsy ymj "nsyjw ns ymnx rfssjw3  ymj ljsyqj rfssjwx fsi gjfzy$ tk
ymj htyyfljwx lwjfyq$ jsijfwji ymjr yt rj@ "mjs ymj$ "jwj zsmfuu$1 n
kjqy ijuwjxxji@ "mjs ymj$ wjotnhji1 n x$rufymn%ji ns ymjnw ot$x3  n xf"
kj" mzrfs gjnslx gjxnijx ymjr1 fsi nk fs$ tymjw mfuujsji yt jsyjw ymj
htyyflj1 ymjnw mfwxm rfssjwx fsi wzij lfny tsq$ jsmfshji yt rj ymj
xzujwntw fhhtruqnxmrjsyx tk r$ kwnjsix3  ymj tqi rfs1 n htzqi ujwhjn!j1
tkyjs jsijf!tzwji yt jshtzwflj mnx hmnqiwjs1 fx xtrjynrjx n ktzsi ymfy
mj hfqqji ymjr1 yt hfxy tkk ymjnw rjqfshmtq$3  mj "tzqi yfqp ns f
hmjjwkzq fhhjsy1 "nym fs j#uwjxxnts tk lttisjxx ymfy gjxyt"ji uqjfxzwj
j!js zuts rj3  flfymf qnxyjsji "nym wjxujhy1 mjw j$jx xtrjynrjx knqqji
"nym yjfwx1 "mnhm xmj jsijf!tzwji yt "nuj f"f$ zsujwhjn!ji@ gzy n
ljsjwfqq$ ktzsi ymfy mjw htzsyjsfshj fsi ytsj "jwj rtwj hmjjwkzq fkyjw
mf!nsl qnxyjsji yt ymj j#mtwyfyntsx tk mjw kfymjw3  ny "fx sty ymzx
"nym kjqn#3  mj "fx fq"f$x ymj xfiijxy tk ymj lwtzu1 fsi j!js yt r$
zsuwfhynxji xjsxjx1 mj fuujfwji yt mf!j xzkkjwji rtwj ijjuq$ ymfs mnx
kwnjsix3  gzy nk mnx htzsyjsfshj "fx rtwj xtwwt"kzq1 mnx !tnhj "fx rtwj
hmjjwkzq ymfs ymfy tk mnx xnxyjw1 jxujhnfqq$ "mjs mj fiiwjxxji ymj tqi
rfs3

'n htzqi rjsynts nsszrjwfgqj nsxyfshjx "mnhm1 fqymtzlm xqnlmy1 rfwpji
ymj inxutxnyntsx tk ymjxj frnfgqj htyyfljwx3  ns ymj rnixy tk ut!jwy$
fsi "fsy1 kjqn# hfwwnji "nym uqjfxzwj yt mnx xnxyjw ymj knwxy qnyyqj
"mnyj kqt"jw ymfy ujjuji tzy kwtr gjsjfym ymj xst"$ lwtzsi3  jfwq$ ns
ymj rtwsnsl1 gjktwj xmj mfi wnxjs1 mj hqjfwji f"f$ ymj xst" ymfy
tgxywzhyji mjw ufym yt ymj rnqp2mtzxj1 iwj" "fyjw kwtr ymj "jqq1 fsi
gwtzlmy ymj "tti kwtr ymj tzymtzxj1 "mjwj1 yt mnx ujwujyzfq
fxytsnxmrjsy1 mj ktzsi mnx xytwj fq"f$x wjuqjsnxmji g$ fs ns!nxngqj
mfsi3  ns ymj if$1 n gjqnj!j1 mj "twpji xtrjynrjx ktw f sjnlmgtzwnsl
kfwrjw1 gjhfzxj mj tkyjs "jsy ktwym fsi ini sty wjyzws zsynq inssjw1
$jy gwtzlmy st "tti "nym mnr3  fy tymjw ynrjx mj "twpji ns ymj lfwijs1
gzy fx ymjwj "fx qnyyqj yt it ns ymj kwtxy$ xjfxts1 mj wjfi yt ymj tqi
rfs fsi flfymf3

'ymnx wjfinsl mfi uz%%qji rj j#ywjrjq$ fy knwxy1 gzy g$ ijlwjjx n
inxht!jwji ymfy mj zyyjwji rfs$ tk ymj xfrj xtzsix "mjs mj wjfi fx "mjs
mj yfqpji3  n htsojhyzwji1 ymjwjktwj1 ymfy mj ktzsi ts ymj ufujw xnlsx
ktw xujjhm "mnhm mj zsijwxytti1 fsi n fwijsyq$ qtslji yt htruwjmjsi
ymjxj fqxt@ gzy mt" "fx ymfy utxxngqj "mjs n ini sty j!js zsijwxyfsi
ymj xtzsix ktw "mnhm ymj$ xytti fx xnlsxd  n nruwt!ji1 mt"j!jw1
xjsxngq$ ns ymnx xhnjshj1 gzy sty xzkknhnjsyq$ yt ktqqt" zu fs$ pnsi tk
hts!jwxfynts1 fqymtzlm n fuuqnji r$ "mtqj rnsi yt ymj jsijf!tzw1 ktw n
jfxnq$ ujwhjn!ji ymfy1 fqymtzlm n jfljwq$ qtslji yt inxht!jw r$xjqk yt
ymj htyyfljwx1 n tzlmy sty yt rfpj ymj fyyjruy zsynq n mfi knwxy gjhtrj
rfxyjw tk ymjnw qfslzflj1 "mnhm pst"qjilj rnlmy jsfgqj rj yt rfpj ymjr
t!jwqttp ymj ijktwrny$ tk r$ knlzwj1 ktw "nym ymnx fqxt ymj htsywfxy
ujwujyzfqq$ uwjxjsyji yt r$ j$jx mfi rfij rj fhvzfnsyji3

'n mfi firnwji ymj ujwkjhy ktwrx tk r$ htyyfljwx22ymjnw lwfhj1 gjfzy$1
fsi ijqnhfyj htruqj#ntsx@ gzy mt" "fx n yjwwnknji "mjs n !nj"ji r$xjqk
ns f ywfsxufwjsy uttq&  fy knwxy n xyfwyji gfhp1 zsfgqj yt gjqnj!j ymfy
ny "fx nsijji n "mt "fx wjkqjhyji ns ymj rnwwtw@ fsi "mjs n gjhfrj
kzqq$ hts!nshji ymfy n "fx ns wjfqny$ ymj rtsxyjw ymfy n fr1 n "fx
knqqji "nym ymj gnyyjwjxy xjsxfyntsx tk ijxutsijshj fsi rtwynknhfynts3
fqfx&  n ini sty $jy jsynwjq$ pst" ymj kfyfq jkkjhyx tk ymnx rnxjwfgqj
ijktwrny$3

'fx ymj xzs gjhfrj "fwrjw fsi ymj qnlmy tk if$ qtsljw1 ymj xst"
!fsnxmji1 fsi n gjmjqi ymj gfwj ywjjx fsi ymj gqfhp jfwym3  kwtr ymnx
ynrj kjqn# "fx rtwj jruqt$ji1 fsi ymj mjfwy2rt!nsl nsinhfyntsx tk
nrujsinsl kfrnsj inxfuujfwji3  ymjnw ktti1 fx n fkyjw"fwix ktzsi1 "fx
htfwxj1 gzy ny "fx "mtqjxtrj@ fsi ymj$ uwthzwji f xzkknhnjsh$ tk ny3
xj!jwfq sj" pnsix tk uqfsyx xuwfsl zu ns ymj lfwijs1 "mnhm ymj$
iwjxxji@ fsi ymjxj xnlsx tk htrktwy nshwjfxji ifnq$ fx ymj xjfxts
fi!fshji3

'ymj tqi rfs1 qjfsnsl ts mnx xts1 "fqpji jfhm if$ fy stts1 "mjs ny ini
sty wfns1 fx n ktzsi ny "fx hfqqji "mjs ymj mjf!jsx utzwji ktwym nyx
"fyjwx3  ymnx kwjvzjsyq$ yttp uqfhj1 gzy f mnlm "nsi vznhpq$ iwnji ymj
jfwym1 fsi ymj xjfxts gjhfrj kfw rtwj uqjfxfsy ymfs ny mfi gjjs3

'r$ rtij tk qnkj ns r$ mt!jq "fx zsnktwr3  izwnsl ymj rtwsnsl n
fyyjsiji ymj rtyntsx tk ymj htyyfljwx1 fsi "mjs ymj$ "jwj inxujwxji ns
!fwntzx thhzufyntsx1 n xqjuy@ ymj wjrfnsijw tk ymj if$ "fx xujsy ns
tgxjw!nsl r$ kwnjsix3  "mjs ymj$ mfi wjynwji yt wjxy1 nk ymjwj "fx fs$
rtts tw ymj snlmy "fx xyfw2qnlmy1 n "jsy nsyt ymj "ttix fsi htqqjhyji
r$ t"s ktti fsi kzjq ktw ymj htyyflj3  "mjs n wjyzwsji1 fx tkyjs fx ny
"fx sjhjxxfw$1 n hqjfwji ymjnw ufym kwtr ymj xst" fsi ujwktwrji ymtxj
tkknhjx ymfy n mfi xjjs itsj g$ kjqn#3  n fkyjw"fwix ktzsi ymfy ymjxj
qfgtzwx1 ujwktwrji g$ fs ns!nxngqj mfsi1 lwjfyq$ fxytsnxmji ymjr@ fsi
tshj tw y"nhj n mjfwi ymjr1 ts ymjxj thhfxntsx1 zyyjw ymj "twix -ltti
xunwny1- -"tsijwkzq-@ gzy n ini sty ymjs zsijwxyfsi ymj xnlsnknhfynts
tk ymjxj yjwrx3

'r$ ymtzlmyx st" gjhfrj rtwj fhyn!j1 fsi n qtslji yt inxht!jw ymj
rtyn!jx fsi kjjqnslx tk ymjxj qt!jq$ hwjfyzwjx@ n "fx nsvznxnyn!j yt
pst" "m$ kjqn# fuujfwji xt rnxjwfgqj fsi flfymf xt xfi3  n ymtzlmy
.kttqnxm "wjyhm&/ ymfy ny rnlmy gj ns r$ ut"jw yt wjxytwj mfuunsjxx yt
ymjxj ijxjw!nsl ujtuqj3  "mjs n xqjuy tw "fx fgxjsy1 ymj ktwrx tk ymj
!jsjwfgqj gqnsi kfymjw1 ymj ljsyqj flfymf1 fsi ymj j#hjqqjsy kjqn#
kqnyyji gjktwj rj3  n qttpji zuts ymjr fx xzujwntw gjnslx "mt "tzqi gj
ymj fwgnyjwx tk r$ kzyzwj ijxyns$3  n ktwrji ns r$ nrflnsfynts f
ymtzxfsi unhyzwjx tk uwjxjsynsl r$xjqk yt ymjr1 fsi ymjnw wjhjuynts tk
rj3  n nrflnsji ymfy ymj$ "tzqi gj inxlzxyji1 zsynq1 g$ r$ ljsyqj
ijrjfstzw fsi htshnqnfynsl "twix1 n xmtzqi knwxy "ns ymjnw kf!tzw fsi
fkyjw"fwix ymjnw qt!j3

'ymjxj ymtzlmyx j#mnqfwfyji rj fsi qji rj yt fuuq$ "nym kwjxm fwitzw yt
ymj fhvznwnsl ymj fwy tk qfslzflj3  r$ twlfsx "jwj nsijji mfwxm1 gzy
xzuuqj@ fsi fqymtzlm r$ !tnhj "fx !jw$ zsqnpj ymj xtky rzxnh tk ymjnw
ytsjx1 $jy n uwtstzshji xzhm "twix fx n zsijwxytti "nym ytqjwfgqj jfxj3
ny "fx fx ymj fxx fsi ymj qfu2itl@ $jy xzwjq$ ymj ljsyqj fxx "mtxj
nsyjsyntsx "jwj fkkjhyntsfyj1 fqymtzlm mnx rfssjwx "jwj wzij1 ijxjw!ji
gjyyjw ywjfyrjsy ymfs gqt"x fsi j#jhwfynts3

'ymj uqjfxfsy xmt"jwx fsi ljsnfq "fwrym tk xuwnsl lwjfyq$ fqyjwji ymj
fxujhy tk ymj jfwym3  rjs "mt gjktwj ymnx hmfslj xjjrji yt mf!j gjjs
mni ns hf!jx inxujwxji ymjrxjq!jx fsi "jwj jruqt$ji ns !fwntzx fwyx tk
hzqyn!fynts3  ymj gnwix xfsl ns rtwj hmjjwkzq styjx1 fsi ymj qjf!jx
gjlfs yt gzi ktwym ts ymj ywjjx3  mfuu$1 mfuu$ jfwym&  kny mfgnyfynts
ktw ltix1 "mnhm1 xt xmtwy f ynrj gjktwj1 "fx gqjfp1 ifru1 fsi
zs"mtqjxtrj3  r$ xunwnyx "jwj jqj!fyji g$ ymj jshmfsynsl fuujfwfshj tk
sfyzwj@ ymj ufxy "fx gqtyyji kwtr r$ rjrtw$1 ymj uwjxjsy "fx ywfsvznq1
fsi ymj kzyzwj lnqiji g$ gwnlmy wf$x tk mtuj fsi fsynhnufyntsx tk ot$3'



hmfuyjw 68

'n st" mfxyjs yt ymj rtwj rt!nsl ufwy tk r$ xytw$3  n xmfqq wjqfyj
j!jsyx ymfy nruwjxxji rj "nym kjjqnslx "mnhm1 kwtr "mfy n mfi gjjs1
mf!j rfij rj "mfy n fr3

'xuwnsl fi!fshji wfuniq$@ ymj "jfymjw gjhfrj knsj fsi ymj xpnjx
hqtziqjxx3  ny xzwuwnxji rj ymfy "mfy gjktwj "fx ijxjwy fsi lqttr$
xmtzqi st" gqttr "nym ymj rtxy gjfzynkzq kqt"jwx fsi !jwizwj3  r$
xjsxjx "jwj lwfynknji fsi wjkwjxmji g$ f ymtzxfsi xhjsyx tk ijqnlmy fsi
f ymtzxfsi xnlmyx tk gjfzy$3

'ny "fx ts tsj tk ymjxj if$x1 "mjs r$ htyyfljwx ujwntinhfqq$ wjxyji
kwtr qfgtzw22ymj tqi rfs uqf$ji ts mnx lznyfw1 fsi ymj hmnqiwjs
qnxyjsji yt mnr22ymfy n tgxjw!ji ymj htzsyjsfshj tk kjqn# "fx
rjqfshmtq$ gj$tsi j#uwjxxnts@ mj xnlmji kwjvzjsyq$1 fsi tshj mnx kfymjw
ufzxji ns mnx rzxnh1 fsi n htsojhyzwji g$ mnx rfssjw ymfy mj nsvznwji
ymj hfzxj tk mnx xts-x xtwwt"3  kjqn# wjuqnji ns f hmjjwkzq fhhjsy1 fsi
ymj tqi rfs "fx wjhtrrjshnsl mnx rzxnh "mjs xtrjtsj yfuuji fy ymj ittw3

'ny "fx f qfi$ ts mtwxjgfhp1 fhhtrufsnji g$ f htzsyw$2rfs fx f lznij3
ymj qfi$ "fx iwjxxji ns f ifwp xzny fsi ht!jwji "nym f ymnhp gqfhp
!jnq3  flfymf fxpji f vzjxynts1 yt "mnhm ymj xywfsljw tsq$ wjuqnji g$
uwtstzshnsl1 ns f x"jjy fhhjsy1 ymj sfrj tk kjqn#3  mjw !tnhj "fx
rzxnhfq gzy zsqnpj ymfy tk jnymjw tk r$ kwnjsix3  ts mjfwnsl ymnx "twi1
kjqn# hfrj zu mfxynq$ yt ymj qfi$1 "mt1 "mjs xmj xf" mnr1 ymwj" zu mjw
!jnq1 fsi n gjmjqi f htzsyjsfshj tk fsljqnh gjfzy$ fsi j#uwjxxnts3  mjw
mfnw tk f xmnsnsl wf!js gqfhp1 fsi hzwntzxq$ gwfniji@ mjw j$jx "jwj
ifwp1 gzy ljsyqj1 fqymtzlm fsnrfyji@ mjw kjfyzwjx tk f wjlzqfw
uwtutwynts1 fsi mjw htruqj#nts "tsiwtzxq$ kfnw1 jfhm hmjjp ynslji "nym
f qt!jq$ unsp3

'kjqn# xjjrji wf!nxmji "nym ijqnlmy "mjs mj xf" mjw1 j!jw$ ywfny tk
xtwwt" !fsnxmji kwtr mnx kfhj1 fsi ny nsxyfsyq$ j#uwjxxji f ijlwjj tk
jhxyfynh ot$1 tk "mnhm n htzqi mfwiq$ mf!j gjqnj!ji ny hfufgqj@ mnx
j$jx xufwpqji1 fx mnx hmjjp kqzxmji "nym uqjfxzwj@ fsi fy ymfy rtrjsy n
ymtzlmy mnr fx gjfzynkzq fx ymj xywfsljw3  xmj fuujfwji fkkjhyji g$
inkkjwjsy kjjqnslx@ "nunsl f kj" yjfwx kwtr mjw qt!jq$ j$jx1 xmj mjqi
tzy mjw mfsi yt kjqn#1 "mt pnxxji ny wfuyzwtzxq$ fsi hfqqji mjw1 fx
"jqq fx n htzqi inxynslznxm1 mnx x"jjy fwfgnfs3  xmj ini sty fuujfw yt
zsijwxyfsi mnr1 gzy xrnqji3  mj fxxnxyji mjw yt inxrtzsy1 fsi
inxrnxxnsl mjw lznij1 htsizhyji mjw nsyt ymj htyyflj3  xtrj
hts!jwxfynts yttp uqfhj gjy"jjs mnr fsi mnx kfymjw1 fsi ymj $tzsl
xywfsljw psjqy fy ymj tqi rfs-x kjjy fsi "tzqi mf!j pnxxji mnx mfsi1
gzy mj wfnxji mjw fsi jrgwfhji mjw fkkjhyntsfyjq$3

'n xtts ujwhjn!ji ymfy fqymtzlm ymj xywfsljw zyyjwji fwynhzqfyj xtzsix
fsi fuujfwji yt mf!j f qfslzflj tk mjw t"s1 xmj "fx sjnymjw zsijwxytti
g$ stw mjwxjqk zsijwxytti ymj htyyfljwx3  ymj$ rfij rfs$ xnlsx "mnhm n
ini sty htruwjmjsi1 gzy n xf" ymfy mjw uwjxjshj inkkzxji lqfisjxx
ymwtzlm ymj htyyflj1 inxujqqnsl ymjnw xtwwt" fx ymj xzs inxxnufyjx ymj
rtwsnsl rnxyx3  kjqn# xjjrji ujhzqnfwq$ mfuu$ fsi "nym xrnqjx tk
ijqnlmy "jqhtrji mnx fwfgnfs3  flfymf1 ymj j!jw2ljsyqj flfymf1 pnxxji
ymj mfsix tk ymj qt!jq$ xywfsljw1 fsi utnsynsl yt mjw gwtymjw1 rfij
xnlsx "mnhm fuujfwji yt rj yt rjfs ymfy mj mfi gjjs xtwwt"kzq zsynq xmj
hfrj3  xtrj mtzwx ufxxji ymzx1 "mnqj ymj$1 g$ ymjnw htzsyjsfshjx1
j#uwjxxji ot$1 ymj hfzxj tk "mnhm n ini sty htruwjmjsi3  uwjxjsyq$ n
ktzsi1 g$ ymj kwjvzjsy wjhzwwjshj tk xtrj xtzsi "mnhm ymj xywfsljw
wjujfyji fkyjw ymjr1 ymfy xmj "fx jsijf!tzwnsl yt qjfws ymjnw qfslzflj@
fsi ymj nijf nsxyfsyq$ thhzwwji yt rj ymfy n xmtzqi rfpj zxj tk ymj
xfrj nsxywzhyntsx yt ymj xfrj jsi3  ymj xywfsljw qjfwsji fgtzy y"jsy$
"twix fy ymj knwxy qjxxts@ rtxy tk ymjr1 nsijji1 "jwj ymtxj "mnhm n mfi
gjktwj zsijwxytti1 gzy n uwtknyji g$ ymj tymjwx3

'fx snlmy hfrj ts1 flfymf fsi ymj fwfgnfs wjynwji jfwq$3  "mjs ymj$
xjufwfyji kjqn# pnxxji ymj mfsi tk ymj xywfsljw fsi xfni1 -ltti snlmy
x"jjy xfknj3-  mj xfy zu rzhm qtsljw1 hts!jwxnsl "nym mnx kfymjw1 fsi
g$ ymj kwjvzjsy wjujynynts tk mjw sfrj n htsojhyzwji ymfy ymjnw qt!jq$
lzjxy "fx ymj xzgojhy tk ymjnw hts!jwxfynts3  n fwijsyq$ ijxnwji yt
zsijwxyfsi ymjr1 fsi gjsy j!jw$ kfhzqy$ yt"fwix ymfy uzwutxj1 gzy ktzsi
ny zyyjwq$ nrutxxngqj3

'ymj sj#y rtwsnsl kjqn# "jsy tzy yt mnx "twp1 fsi fkyjw ymj zxzfq
thhzufyntsx tk flfymf "jwj knsnxmji1 ymj fwfgnfs xfy fy ymj kjjy tk ymj
tqi rfs1 fsi yfpnsl mnx lznyfw1 uqf$ji xtrj fnwx xt jsywfshnslq$
gjfzynkzq ymfy ymj$ fy tshj iwj" yjfwx tk xtwwt" fsi ijqnlmy kwtr r$
j$jx3  xmj xfsl1 fsi mjw !tnhj kqt"ji ns f wnhm hfijshj1 x"jqqnsl tw
i$nsl f"f$ qnpj f snlmynslfqj tk ymj "ttix3

'"mjs xmj mfi knsnxmji1 xmj lf!j ymj lznyfw yt flfymf1 "mt fy knwxy
ijhqnsji ny3  xmj uqf$ji f xnruqj fnw1 fsi mjw !tnhj fhhtrufsnji ny ns
x"jjy fhhjsyx1 gzy zsqnpj ymj "tsiwtzx xywfns tk ymj xywfsljw3  ymj tqi
rfs fuujfwji jswfuyzwji fsi xfni xtrj "twix "mnhm flfymf jsijf!tzwji yt
j#uqfns yt xfknj1 fsi g$ "mnhm mj fuujfwji yt "nxm yt j#uwjxx ymfy xmj
gjxyt"ji ts mnr ymj lwjfyjxy ijqnlmy g$ mjw rzxnh3

'ymj if$x st" ufxxji fx ujfhjfgq$ fx gjktwj1 "nym ymj xtqj fqyjwfynts
ymfy ot$ mfi yfpjs uqfhj tk xfisjxx ns ymj htzsyjsfshjx tk r$ kwnjsix3
xfknj "fx fq"f$x lf$ fsi mfuu$@ xmj fsi n nruwt!ji wfuniq$ ns ymj
pst"qjilj tk qfslzflj1 xt ymfy ns y"t rtsymx n gjlfs yt htruwjmjsi rtxy
tk ymj "twix zyyjwji g$ r$ uwtyjhytwx3

'ns ymj rjfs"mnqj fqxt ymj gqfhp lwtzsi "fx ht!jwji "nym mjwgflj1 fsi
ymj lwjjs gfspx nsyjwxujwxji "nym nsszrjwfgqj kqt"jwx1 x"jjy yt ymj
xhjsy fsi ymj j$jx1 xyfwx tk ufqj wfinfshj frtsl ymj rttsqnlmy "ttix@
ymj xzs gjhfrj "fwrjw1 ymj snlmyx hqjfw fsi gfqr$@ fsi r$ sthyzwsfq
wfrgqjx "jwj fs j#ywjrj uqjfxzwj yt rj1 fqymtzlm ymj$ "jwj htsxnijwfgq$
xmtwyjsji g$ ymj qfyj xjyynsl fsi jfwq$ wnxnsl tk ymj xzs1 ktw n sj!jw
!jsyzwji fgwtfi izwnsl if$qnlmy1 kjfwkzq tk rjjynsl "nym ymj xfrj
ywjfyrjsy n mfi ktwrjwq$ jsizwji ns ymj knwxy !nqqflj "mnhm n jsyjwji3

'r$ if$x "jwj xujsy ns hqtxj fyyjsynts1 ymfy n rnlmy rtwj xujjinq$
rfxyjw ymj qfslzflj@ fsi n rf$ gtfxy ymfy n nruwt!ji rtwj wfuniq$ ymfs
ymj fwfgnfs1 "mt zsijwxytti !jw$ qnyyqj fsi hts!jwxji ns gwtpjs
fhhjsyx1 "mnqxy n htruwjmjsiji fsi htzqi nrnyfyj fqrtxy j!jw$ "twi ymfy
"fx xutpjs3

'"mnqj n nruwt!ji ns xujjhm1 n fqxt qjfwsji ymj xhnjshj tk qjyyjwx fx
ny "fx yfzlmy yt ymj xywfsljw1 fsi ymnx tujsji gjktwj rj f "nij knjqi
ktw "tsijw fsi ijqnlmy3

'ymj gttp kwtr "mnhm kjqn# nsxywzhyji xfknj "fx !tqsj$-x wznsx tk
jrunwjx3  n xmtzqi sty mf!j zsijwxytti ymj uzwutwy tk ymnx gttp mfi sty
kjqn#1 ns wjfinsl ny1 ln!js !jw$ rnszyj j#uqfsfyntsx3  mj mfi hmtxjs
ymnx "twp1 mj xfni1 gjhfzxj ymj ijhqfrfytw$ xy$qj "fx kwfrji ns
nrnyfynts tk ymj jfxyjws fzymtwx3  ymwtzlm ymnx "twp n tgyfnsji f
hzwxtw$ pst"qjilj tk mnxytw$ fsi f !nj" tk ymj xj!jwfq jrunwjx fy
uwjxjsy j#nxynsl ns ymj "twqi@ ny lf!j rj fs nsxnlmy nsyt ymj rfssjwx1
lt!jwsrjsyx1 fsi wjqnlntsx tk ymj inkkjwjsy sfyntsx tk ymj jfwym3  n
mjfwi tk ymj xqtymkzq fxnfynhx1 tk ymj xyzujsitzx ljsnzx fsi rjsyfq
fhyn!ny$ tk ymj lwjhnfsx1 tk ymj "fwx fsi "tsijwkzq !nwyzj tk ymj jfwq$
wtrfsx22tk ymjnw xzgxjvzjsy ijljsjwfynsl22tk ymj ijhqnsj tk ymfy rnlmy$
jrunwj1 tk hmn!fqw$1 hmwnxynfsny$1 fsi pnslx3  n mjfwi tk ymj inxht!jw$
tk ymj frjwnhfs mjrnxumjwj fsi "juy "nym xfknj t!jw ymj mfuqjxx kfyj tk
nyx twnlnsfq nsmfgnyfsyx3

'ymjxj "tsijwkzq sfwwfyntsx nsxunwji rj "nym xywfslj kjjqnslx3  "fx
rfs1 nsijji1 fy tshj xt ut"jwkzq1 xt !nwyztzx fsi rflsnknhjsy1 $jy xt
!nhntzx fsi gfxjd  mj fuujfwji fy tsj ynrj f rjwj xhnts tk ymj j!nq
uwnshnuqj fsi fy fstymjw fx fqq ymfy hfs gj htshjn!ji tk stgqj fsi
ltiqnpj3  yt gj f lwjfy fsi !nwyztzx rfs fuujfwji ymj mnlmjxy mtstzw
ymfy hfs gjkfqq f xjsxnyn!j gjnsl@ yt gj gfxj fsi !nhntzx1 fx rfs$ ts
wjhtwi mf!j gjjs1 fuujfwji ymj qt"jxy ijlwfifynts1 f htsinynts rtwj
fgojhy ymfs ymfy tk ymj gqnsi rtqj tw mfwrqjxx "twr3  ktw f qtsl ynrj n
htzqi sty htshjn!j mt" tsj rfs htzqi lt ktwym yt rzwijw mnx kjqqt"1 tw
j!js "m$ ymjwj "jwj qf"x fsi lt!jwsrjsyx@ gzy "mjs n mjfwi ijyfnqx tk
!nhj fsi gqttixmji1 r$ "tsijw hjfxji fsi n yzwsji f"f$ "nym inxlzxy fsi
qtfymnsl3

'j!jw$ hts!jwxfynts tk ymj htyyfljwx st" tujsji sj" "tsijwx yt rj3
"mnqj n qnxyjsji yt ymj nsxywzhyntsx "mnhm kjqn# gjxyt"ji zuts ymj
fwfgnfs1 ymj xywfslj x$xyjr tk mzrfs xthnjy$ "fx j#uqfnsji yt rj3  n
mjfwi tk ymj in!nxnts tk uwtujwy$1 tk nrrjsxj "jfqym fsi xvzfqni
ut!jwy$1 tk wfsp1 ijxhjsy1 fsi stgqj gqtti3

'ymj "twix nsizhji rj yt yzws yt"fwix r$xjqk3  n qjfwsji ymfy ymj
utxxjxxntsx rtxy jxyjjrji g$ $tzw kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx "jwj mnlm fsi
zsxzqqnji ijxhjsy zsnyji "nym wnhmjx3  f rfs rnlmy gj wjxujhyji "nym
tsq$ tsj tk ymjxj fi!fsyfljx1 gzy "nymtzy jnymjw mj "fx htsxnijwji1
j#hjuy ns !jw$ wfwj nsxyfshjx1 fx f !flfgtsi fsi f xqf!j1 ittrji yt
"fxyj mnx ut"jwx ktw ymj uwtknyx tk ymj hmtxjs kj"&  fsi "mfy "fx nd tk
r$ hwjfynts fsi hwjfytw n "fx fgxtqzyjq$ nlstwfsy1 gzy n psj" ymfy n
utxxjxxji st rtsj$1 st kwnjsix1 st pnsi tk uwtujwy$3  n "fx1 gjxnijx1
jsizji "nym f knlzwj mnijtzxq$ ijktwrji fsi qtfymxtrj@ n "fx sty j!js
tk ymj xfrj sfyzwj fx rfs3  n "fx rtwj flnqj ymfs ymj$ fsi htzqi
xzgxnxy zuts htfwxjw injy@ n gtwj ymj j#ywjrjx tk mjfy fsi htqi "nym
qjxx nsozw$ yt r$ kwfrj@ r$ xyfyzwj kfw j#hjjiji ymjnwx3  "mjs n qttpji
fwtzsi n xf" fsi mjfwi tk stsj qnpj rj3  "fx n1 ymjs1 f rtsxyjw1 f gqty
zuts ymj jfwym1 kwtr "mnhm fqq rjs kqji fsi "mtr fqq rjs inxt"sjid

'n hfssty ijxhwngj yt $tz ymj flts$ ymfy ymjxj wjkqjhyntsx nskqnhyji
zuts rj@ n ywnji yt inxujq ymjr1 gzy xtwwt" tsq$ nshwjfxji "nym
pst"qjilj3  tm1 ymfy n mfi ktwj!jw wjrfnsji ns r$ sfyn!j "tti1 stw
pst"s stw kjqy gj$tsi ymj xjsxfyntsx tk mzsljw1 ymnwxy1 fsi mjfy&

'tk "mfy f xywfslj sfyzwj nx pst"qjilj&  ny hqnslx yt ymj rnsi "mjs ny
mfx tshj xjn%ji ts ny qnpj f qnhmjs ts ymj wthp3  n "nxmji xtrjynrjx yt
xmfpj tkk fqq ymtzlmy fsi kjjqnsl1 gzy n qjfwsji ymfy ymjwj "fx gzy tsj
rjfsx yt t!jwhtrj ymj xjsxfynts tk ufns1 fsi ymfy "fx ijfym22f xyfyj
"mnhm n kjfwji $jy ini sty zsijwxyfsi3  n firnwji !nwyzj fsi ltti
kjjqnslx fsi qt!ji ymj ljsyqj rfssjwx fsi frnfgqj vzfqnynjx tk r$
htyyfljwx1 gzy n "fx xmzy tzy kwtr nsyjwhtzwxj "nym ymjr1 j#hjuy
ymwtzlm rjfsx "mnhm n tgyfnsji g$ xyjfqym1 "mjs n "fx zsxjjs fsi
zspst"s1 fsi "mnhm wfymjw nshwjfxji ymfs xfynxknji ymj ijxnwj n mfi tk
gjhtrnsl tsj frtsl r$ kjqqt"x3  ymj ljsyqj "twix tk flfymf fsi  ymj
fsnrfyji xrnqjx tk ymj hmfwrnsl fwfgnfs "jwj sty ktw rj3  ymj rnqi
j#mtwyfyntsx tk ymj tqi rfs fsi ymj qn!jq$ hts!jwxfynts tk ymj qt!ji
kjqn# "jwj sty ktw rj3 rnxjwfgqj1 zsmfuu$ "wjyhm&

'tymjw qjxxtsx "jwj nruwjxxji zuts rj j!js rtwj ijjuq$3  n mjfwi tk ymj
inkkjwjshj tk xj#jx1 fsi ymj gnwym fsi lwt"ym tk hmnqiwjs1 mt" ymj
kfymjw ityji ts ymj xrnqjx tk ymj nskfsy1 fsi ymj qn!jq$ xfqqnjx tk ymj
tqijw hmnqi1 mt" fqq ymj qnkj fsi hfwjx tk ymj rtymjw "jwj "wfuuji zu
ns ymj uwjhntzx hmfwlj1 mt" ymj rnsi tk $tzym j#ufsiji fsi lfnsji
pst"qjilj1 tk gwtymjw1 xnxyjw1 fsi fqq ymj !fwntzx wjqfyntsxmnux "mnhm
gnsi tsj mzrfs gjnsl yt fstymjw ns rzyzfq gtsix3

'gzy "mjwj "jwj r$ kwnjsix fsi wjqfyntsxd  st kfymjw mfi "fyhmji r$
nskfsy if$x1 st rtymjw mfi gqjxxji rj "nym xrnqjx fsi hfwjxxjx@ tw nk
ymj$ mfi1 fqq r$ ufxy qnkj "fx st" f gqty1 f gqnsi !fhfsh$ ns "mnhm n
inxynslznxmji stymnsl3  kwtr r$ jfwqnjxy wjrjrgwfshj n mfi gjjs fx n
ymjs "fx ns mjnlmy fsi uwtutwynts3  n mfi sj!jw $jy xjjs f gjnsl
wjxjrgqnsl rj tw "mt hqfnrji fs$ nsyjwhtzwxj "nym rj3  "mfy "fx nd  ymj
vzjxynts flfns wjhzwwji1 yt gj fsx"jwji tsq$ "nym lwtfsx3

'n "nqq xtts j#uqfns yt "mfy ymjxj kjjqnslx yjsiji1 gzy fqqt" rj st" yt
wjyzws yt ymj htyyfljwx1 "mtxj xytw$ j#hnyji ns rj xzhm !fwntzx
kjjqnslx tk nsinlsfynts1 ijqnlmy1 fsi "tsijw1 gzy "mnhm fqq yjwrnsfyji
ns fiinyntsfq qt!j fsi wj!jwjshj ktw r$ uwtyjhytwx .ktw xt n qt!ji1 ns
fs nssthjsy1 mfqk2ufnskzq xjqk2ijhjny1 yt hfqq ymjr/3'



hmfuyjw 69

'xtrj ynrj jqfuxji gjktwj n qjfwsji ymj mnxytw$ tk r$ kwnjsix3  ny "fx
tsj "mnhm htzqi sty kfnq yt nruwjxx nyxjqk ijjuq$ ts r$ rnsi1 zsktqinsl
fx ny ini f szrgjw tk hnwhzrxyfshjx1 jfhm nsyjwjxynsl fsi "tsijwkzq yt
tsj xt zyyjwq$ nsj#ujwnjshji fx n "fx3

'ymj sfrj tk ymj tqi rfs "fx ij qfhj$3  mj "fx ijxhjsiji kwtr f ltti
kfrnq$ ns kwfshj1 "mjwj mj mfi qn!ji ktw rfs$ $jfwx ns fkkqzjshj1
wjxujhyji g$ mnx xzujwntwx fsi gjqt!ji g$ mnx jvzfqx3  mnx xts "fx gwji
ns ymj xjw!nhj tk mnx htzsyw$1 fsi flfymf mfi wfspji "nym qfinjx tk ymj
mnlmjxy inxynshynts3  f kj" rtsymx gjktwj r$ fwwn!fq ymj$ mfi qn!ji ns
f qfwlj fsi qz#zwntzx hny$ hfqqji ufwnx1 xzwwtzsiji g$ kwnjsix fsi
utxxjxxji tk j!jw$ jsot$rjsy "mnhm !nwyzj1 wjknsjrjsy tk nsyjqqjhy1 tw
yfxyj1 fhhtrufsnji g$ f rtijwfyj ktwyzsj1 htzqi fkktwi3

'ymj kfymjw tk xfknj mfi gjjs ymj hfzxj tk ymjnw wzns3  mj "fx f
yzwpnxm rjwhmfsy fsi mfi nsmfgnyji ufwnx ktw rfs$ $jfwx1 "mjs1 ktw xtrj
wjfxts "mnhm n htzqi sty qjfws1 mj gjhfrj tgst#ntzx yt ymj lt!jwsrjsy3
mj "fx xjn%ji fsi hfxy nsyt uwnxts ymj !jw$ if$ ymfy xfknj fwwn!ji kwtr
htsxyfsynstuqj yt otns mnr3  mj "fx ywnji fsi htsijrsji yt ijfym3  ymj
nsozxynhj tk mnx xjsyjshj "fx !jw$ kqflwfsy@ fqq ufwnx "fx nsinlsfsy@
fsi ny "fx ozilji ymfy mnx wjqnlnts fsi "jfqym wfymjw ymfs ymj hwnrj
fqqjlji flfnsxy mnr mfi gjjs ymj hfzxj tk mnx htsijrsfynts3

'kjqn# mfi fhhnijsyfqq$ gjjs uwjxjsy fy ymj ywnfq@ mnx mtwwtw fsi
nsinlsfynts "jwj zshtsywtqqfgqj "mjs mj mjfwi ymj ijhnxnts tk ymj
htzwy3  mj rfij1 fy ymfy rtrjsy1 f xtqjrs !t" yt ijqn!jw mnr fsi ymjs
qttpji fwtzsi ktw ymj rjfsx3  fkyjw rfs$ kwznyqjxx fyyjruyx yt lfns
firnyyfshj yt ymj uwnxts1 mj ktzsi f xywtslq$ lwfyji "nsit" ns fs
zslzfwiji ufwy tk ymj gznqinsl1 "mnhm qnlmyji ymj izsljts tk ymj
zsktwyzsfyj rzmfrrfifs1 "mt1 qtfiji "nym hmfnsx1 "fnyji ns ijxufnw ymj
j#jhzynts tk ymj gfwgfwtzx xjsyjshj3  kjqn# !nxnyji ymj lwfyj fy snlmy
fsi rfij pst"s yt ymj uwnxtsjw mnx nsyjsyntsx ns mnx kf!tzw3  ymj yzwp1
frf%ji fsi ijqnlmyji1 jsijf!tzwji yt pnsiqj ymj %jfq tk mnx ijqn!jwjw
g$ uwtrnxjx tk wj"fwi fsi "jfqym3  kjqn# wjojhyji mnx tkkjwx "nym
htsyjruy1 $jy "mjs mj xf" ymj qt!jq$ xfknj1 "mt "fx fqqt"ji yt !nxny
mjw kfymjw fsi "mt g$ mjw ljxyzwjx j#uwjxxji mjw qn!jq$ lwfynyzij1 ymj
$tzym htzqi sty mjqu t"snsl yt mnx t"s rnsi ymfy ymj hfuyn!j utxxjxxji
f ywjfxzwj "mnhm "tzqi kzqq$ wj"fwi mnx ytnq fsi mf%fwi3

'ymj yzwp vznhpq$ ujwhjn!ji ymj nruwjxxnts ymfy mnx ifzlmyjw mfi rfij
ts ymj mjfwy tk kjqn# fsi jsijf!tzwji yt xjhzwj mnr rtwj jsynwjq$ ns
mnx nsyjwjxyx g$ ymj uwtrnxj tk mjw mfsi ns rfwwnflj xt xtts fx mj
xmtzqi gj hts!j$ji yt f uqfhj tk xfkjy$3  kjqn# "fx ytt ijqnhfyj yt
fhhjuy ymnx tkkjw1 $jy mj qttpji ktw"fwi yt ymj uwtgfgnqny$ tk ymj
j!jsy fx yt ymj htsxzrrfynts tk mnx mfuunsjxx3

'izwnsl ymj jsxznsl if$x1 "mnqj ymj uwjufwfyntsx "jwj ltnsl ktw"fwi ktw
ymj jxhfuj tk ymj rjwhmfsy1 ymj %jfq tk kjqn# "fx "fwrji g$ xj!jwfq
qjyyjwx ymfy mj wjhjn!ji kwtr ymnx qt!jq$ lnwq1 "mt ktzsi rjfsx yt
j#uwjxx mjw ymtzlmyx ns ymj qfslzflj tk mjw qt!jw g$ ymj fni tk fs tqi
rfs1 f xjw!fsy tk mjw kfymjw "mt zsijwxytti kwjshm3  xmj ymfspji mnr ns
ymj rtxy fwijsy yjwrx ktw mnx nsyjsiji xjw!nhjx yt"fwix mjw ufwjsy1 fsi
fy ymj xfrj ynrj xmj ljsyq$ ijuqtwji mjw t"s kfyj3

'n mf!j htunjx tk ymjxj qjyyjwx1 ktw n ktzsi rjfsx1 izwnsl r$ wjxnijshj
ns ymj mt!jq1 yt uwthzwj ymj nruqjrjsyx tk "wnynsl@ fsi ymj qjyyjwx
"jwj tkyjs ns ymj mfsix tk kjqn# tw flfymf3  gjktwj n ijufwy n "nqq
ln!j ymjr yt $tz@ ymj$ "nqq uwt!j ymj ywzym tk r$ yfqj@ gzy fy uwjxjsy1
fx ymj xzs nx fqwjfi$ kfw ijhqnsji1 n xmfqq tsq$ mf!j ynrj yt wjujfy
ymj xzgxyfshj tk ymjr yt $tz3

'xfknj wjqfyji ymfy mjw rtymjw "fx f hmwnxynfs fwfg1 xjn%ji fsi rfij f
xqf!j g$ ymj yzwpx@ wjhtrrjsiji g$ mjw gjfzy$1 xmj mfi "ts ymj mjfwy tk
ymj kfymjw tk xfknj1 "mt rfwwnji mjw3  ymj $tzsl lnwq xutpj ns mnlm fsi
jsymzxnfxynh yjwrx tk mjw rtymjw1 "mt1 gtws ns kwjjitr1 xuzwsji ymj
gtsiflj yt "mnhm xmj "fx st" wjizhji3  xmj nsxywzhyji mjw ifzlmyjw ns
ymj yjsjyx tk mjw wjqnlnts fsi yfzlmy mjw yt fxunwj yt mnlmjw ut"jwx tk
nsyjqqjhy fsi fs nsijujsijshj tk xunwny ktwgniijs yt ymj kjrfqj
ktqqt"jwx tk rzmfrrfi3  ymnx qfi$ inji1 gzy mjw qjxxtsx "jwj nsijqngq$
nruwjxxji ts ymj rnsi tk xfknj1 "mt xnhpjsji fy ymj uwtxujhy tk flfns
wjyzwsnsl yt fxnf fsi gjnsl nrrzwji "nymns ymj "fqqx tk f mfwjr1
fqqt"ji tsq$ yt thhzu$ mjwxjqk "nym nskfsynqj frzxjrjsyx1 nqq2xznyji yt
ymj yjrujw tk mjw xtzq1 st" fhhzxytrji yt lwfsi nijfx fsi f stgqj
jrzqfynts ktw !nwyzj3  ymj uwtxujhy tk rfww$nsl f hmwnxynfs fsi
wjrfnsnsl ns f htzsyw$ "mjwj "trjs "jwj fqqt"ji yt yfpj f wfsp ns
xthnjy$ "fx jshmfsynsl yt mjw3

'ymj if$ ktw ymj j#jhzynts tk ymj yzwp "fx kn#ji1 gzy ts ymj snlmy
uwj!ntzx yt ny mj vznyyji mnx uwnxts fsi gjktwj rtwsnsl "fx inxyfsy
rfs$ qjflzjx kwtr ufwnx3  kjqn# mfi uwthzwji ufxxutwyx ns ymj sfrj tk
mnx kfymjw1 xnxyjw1 fsi mnrxjqk3  mj mfi uwj!ntzxq$ htrrzsnhfyji mnx
uqfs yt ymj ktwrjw1 "mt fniji ymj ijhjny g$ vznyynsl mnx mtzxj1 zsijw
ymj uwjyjshj tk f otzwsj$ fsi htshjfqji mnrxjqk1 "nym mnx ifzlmyjw1 ns
fs tgxhzwj ufwy tk ufwnx3

'kjqn# htsizhyji ymj kzlnyn!jx ymwtzlm kwfshj yt q$tsx fsi fhwtxx rtsy
hjsnx yt qjlmtws1 "mjwj ymj rjwhmfsy mfi ijhniji yt "fny f kf!tzwfgqj
tuutwyzsny$ tk ufxxnsl nsyt xtrj ufwy tk ymj yzwpnxm itrnsntsx3

'xfknj wjxtq!ji yt wjrfns "nym mjw kfymjw zsynq ymj rtrjsy tk mnx
ijufwyzwj1 gjktwj "mnhm ynrj ymj yzwp wjsj"ji mnx uwtrnxj ymfy xmj
xmtzqi gj zsnyji yt mnx ijqn!jwjw@ fsi kjqn# wjrfnsji "nym ymjr ns
j#ujhyfynts tk ymfy j!jsy@ fsi ns ymj rjfsynrj mj jsot$ji ymj xthnjy$
tk ymj fwfgnfs1 "mt j#mngnyji yt"fwix mnr ymj xnruqjxy fsi yjsijwjxy
fkkjhynts3  ymj$ hts!jwxji "nym tsj fstymjw ymwtzlm ymj rjfsx tk fs
nsyjwuwjyjw1 fsi xtrjynrjx "nym ymj nsyjwuwjyfynts tk qttpx@ fsi xfknj
xfsl yt mnr ymj in!nsj fnwx tk mjw sfyn!j htzsyw$3

'ymj yzwp fqqt"ji ymnx nsynrfh$ yt yfpj uqfhj fsi jshtzwflji ymj mtujx
tk ymj $tzymkzq qt!jwx1 "mnqj ns mnx mjfwy mj mfi ktwrji kfw tymjw
uqfsx3  mj qtfymji ymj nijf ymfy mnx ifzlmyjw xmtzqi gj zsnyji yt f
hmwnxynfs1 gzy mj kjfwji ymj wjxjsyrjsy tk kjqn# nk mj xmtzqi fuujfw
qzpj"fwr1 ktw mj psj" ymfy mj "fx xynqq ns ymj ut"jw tk mnx ijqn!jwjw
nk mj xmtzqi hmttxj yt gjywf$ mnr yt ymj nyfqnfs xyfyj "mnhm ymj$
nsmfgnyji3  mj wj!tq!ji f ymtzxfsi uqfsx g$ "mnhm mj xmtzqi gj jsfgqji
yt uwtqtsl ymj ijhjny zsynq ny rnlmy gj st qtsljw sjhjxxfw$1 fsi
xjhwjyq$ yt yfpj mnx ifzlmyjw "nym mnr "mjs mj ijufwyji3  mnx uqfsx
"jwj kfhnqnyfyji g$ ymj sj"x "mnhm fwwn!ji kwtr ufwnx3

'ymj lt!jwsrjsy tk kwfshj "jwj lwjfyq$ jswflji fy ymj jxhfuj tk ymjnw
!nhynr fsi xufwji st ufnsx yt ijyjhy fsi uzsnxm mnx ijqn!jwjw3  ymj
uqty tk kjqn# "fx vznhpq$ inxht!jwji1 fsi ij qfhj$ fsi flfymf "jwj
ymwt"s nsyt uwnxts3  ymj sj"x wjfhmji kjqn# fsi wtzxji mnr kwtr mnx
iwjfr tk uqjfxzwj3  mnx gqnsi fsi flji kfymjw fsi mnx ljsyqj xnxyjw qf$
ns f stnxtrj izsljts "mnqj mj jsot$ji ymj kwjj fnw fsi ymj xthnjy$ tk
mjw "mtr mj qt!ji3  ymnx nijf "fx ytwyzwj yt mnr3  mj vznhpq$ fwwfslji
"nym ymj yzwp ymfy nk ymj qfyyjw xmtzqi knsi f kf!tzwfgqj tuutwyzsny$
ktw jxhfuj gjktwj kjqn# htzqi wjyzws yt nyfq$1 xfknj xmtzqi wjrfns fx f
gtfwijw fy f hts!jsy fy qjlmtws@ fsi ymjs1 vznyynsl ymj qt!jq$ fwfgnfs1
mj mfxyjsji yt ufwnx fsi ijqn!jwji mnrxjqk zu yt ymj !jsljfshj tk ymj
qf"1 mtunsl yt kwjj ij qfhj$ fsi flfymf g$ ymnx uwthjjinsl3

'mj ini sty xzhhjji3  ymj$ wjrfnsji htsknsji ktw kn!j rtsymx gjktwj ymj
ywnfq yttp uqfhj1 ymj wjxzqy tk "mnhm ijuwn!ji ymjr tk ymjnw ktwyzsj
fsi htsijrsji ymjr yt f ujwujyzfq j#nqj kwtr ymjnw sfyn!j htzsyw$3

'ymj$ ktzsi f rnxjwfgqj fx$qzr ns ymj htyyflj ns ljwrfs$1 "mjwj n
inxht!jwji ymjr3  kjqn# xtts qjfwsji ymfy ymj ywjfhmjwtzx yzwp1 ktw
"mtr mj fsi mnx kfrnq$ jsizwji xzhm zsmjfwi2tk tuuwjxxnts1 ts
inxht!jwnsl ymfy mnx ijqn!jwjw "fx ymzx wjizhji yt ut!jwy$ fsi wzns1
gjhfrj f ywfnytw yt ltti kjjqnsl fsi mtstzw fsi mfi vznyyji nyfq$ "nym
mnx ifzlmyjw1 nsxzqynslq$ xjsinsl kjqn# f unyyfshj tk rtsj$ yt fni mnr1
fx mj xfni1 ns xtrj uqfs tk kzyzwj rfnsyjsfshj3

'xzhm "jwj ymj j!jsyx ymfy uwj$ji ts ymj mjfwy tk kjqn# fsi wjsijwji
mnr1 "mjs n knwxy xf" mnr1 ymj rtxy rnxjwfgqj tk mnx kfrnq$3  mj htzqi
mf!j jsizwji ut!jwy$1 fsi "mnqj ymnx inxywjxx mfi gjjs ymj rjji tk mnx
!nwyzj1 mj lqtwnji ns ny@ gzy ymj nslwfynyzij tk ymj yzwp fsi ymj qtxx
tk mnx gjqt!ji xfknj "jwj rnxktwyzsjx rtwj gnyyjw fsi nwwjufwfgqj3  ymj
fwwn!fq tk ymj fwfgnfs st" nskzxji sj" qnkj nsyt mnx xtzq3

'"mjs ymj sj"x wjfhmji qjlmtws ymfy kjqn# "fx ijuwn!ji tk mnx "jfqym
fsi wfsp1 ymj rjwhmfsy htrrfsiji mnx ifzlmyjw yt ymnsp st rtwj tk mjw
qt!jw1 gzy yt uwjufwj yt wjyzws yt mjw sfyn!j htzsyw$3  ymj ljsjwtzx
sfyzwj tk xfknj "fx tzywflji g$ ymnx htrrfsi@ xmj fyyjruyji yt
j#utxyzqfyj "nym mjw kfymjw1 gzy mj qjky mjw fslwnq$1 wjnyjwfynsl mnx
y$wfssnhfq rfsifyj3

'f kj" if$x fkyjw1 ymj yzwp jsyjwji mnx ifzlmyjw-x fufwyrjsy fsi ytqi
mjw mfxynq$ ymfy mj mfi wjfxts yt gjqnj!j ymfy mnx wjxnijshj fy qjlmtws
mfi gjjs in!zqlji fsi ymfy mj xmtzqi xujjinq$ gj ijqn!jwji zu yt ymj
kwjshm lt!jwsrjsy@ mj mfi htsxjvzjsyq$ mnwji f !jxxjq yt hts!j$ mnr yt
htsxyfsynstuqj1 ktw "mnhm hny$ mj xmtzqi xfnq ns f kj" mtzwx3  mj
nsyjsiji yt qjf!j mnx ifzlmyjw zsijw ymj hfwj tk f htsknijsynfq
xjw!fsy1 yt ktqqt" fy mjw qjnxzwj "nym ymj lwjfyjw ufwy tk mnx
uwtujwy$1 "mnhm mfi sty $jy fwwn!ji fy qjlmtws3

'"mjs fqtsj1 xfknj wjxtq!ji ns mjw t"s rnsi ymj uqfs tk htsizhy ymfy ny
"tzqi gjhtrj mjw yt uzwxzj ns ymnx jrjwljsh$3  f wjxnijshj ns yzwpj$
"fx fgmtwwjsy yt mjw@ mjw wjqnlnts fsi mjw kjjqnslx "jwj fqnpj f!jwxj
yt ny3  g$ xtrj ufujwx tk mjw kfymjw "mnhm kjqq nsyt mjw mfsix xmj
mjfwi tk ymj j#nqj tk mjw qt!jw fsi qjfwsy ymj sfrj tk ymj xuty "mjwj
mj ymjs wjxniji3  xmj mjxnyfyji xtrj ynrj1 gzy fy qjslym xmj ktwrji mjw
ijyjwrnsfynts3  yfpnsl "nym mjw xtrj oj"jqx ymfy gjqtslji yt mjw fsi f
xzr tk rtsj$1 xmj vznyyji nyfq$ "nym fs fyyjsifsy1 f sfyn!j tk qjlmtws1
gzy "mt zsijwxytti ymj htrrts qfslzflj tk yzwpj$1 fsi ijufwyji ktw
ljwrfs$3

'xmj fwwn!ji ns xfkjy$ fy f yt"s fgtzy y"jsy$ qjflzjx kwtr ymj htyyflj
tk ij qfhj$1 "mjs mjw fyyjsifsy kjqq ifsljwtzxq$ nqq3  xfknj szwxji mjw
"nym ymj rtxy ij!tyji fkkjhynts1 gzy ymj uttw lnwq inji1 fsi ymj
fwfgnfs "fx qjky fqtsj1 zsfhvzfnsyji "nym ymj qfslzflj tk ymj htzsyw$
fsi zyyjwq$ nlstwfsy tk ymj hzxytrx tk ymj "twqi3  xmj kjqq1 mt"j!jw1
nsyt ltti mfsix3  ymj nyfqnfs mfi rjsyntsji ymj sfrj tk ymj xuty ktw
"mnhm ymj$ "jwj gtzsi1 fsi fkyjw mjw ijfym ymj "trfs tk ymj mtzxj ns
"mnhm ymj$ mfi qn!ji yttp hfwj ymfy xfknj xmtzqi fwwn!j ns xfkjy$ fy
ymj htyyflj tk mjw qt!jw3'



hmfuyjw 6:

'xzhm "fx ymj mnxytw$ tk r$ gjqt!ji htyyfljwx3  ny nruwjxxji rj ijjuq$3
n qjfwsji1 kwtr ymj !nj"x tk xthnfq qnkj "mnhm ny ij!jqtuji1 yt firnwj
ymjnw !nwyzjx fsi yt ijuwjhfyj ymj !nhjx tk rfspnsi3

'fx $jy n qttpji zuts hwnrj fx f inxyfsy j!nq1 gjsj!tqjshj fsi
ljsjwtxny$ "jwj j!jw uwjxjsy gjktwj rj1 nshnynsl "nymns rj f ijxnwj yt
gjhtrj fs fhytw ns ymj gzx$ xhjsj "mjwj xt rfs$ firnwfgqj vzfqnynjx
"jwj hfqqji ktwym fsi inxuqf$ji3  gzy ns ln!nsl fs fhhtzsy tk ymj
uwtlwjxx tk r$ nsyjqqjhy1 n rzxy sty trny f hnwhzrxyfshj "mnhm thhzwwji
ns ymj gjlnssnsl tk ymj rtsym tk fzlzxy tk ymj xfrj $jfw3

'tsj snlmy izwnsl r$ fhhzxytrji !nxny yt ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl "tti "mjwj n
htqqjhyji r$ t"s ktti fsi gwtzlmy mtrj knwnsl ktw r$ uwtyjhytwx1 n
ktzsi ts ymj lwtzsi f qjfymjws utwyrfsyjfz htsyfnsnsl xj!jwfq fwynhqjx
tk iwjxx fsi xtrj gttpx3  n jfljwq$ xjn%ji ymj uwn%j fsi wjyzwsji "nym
ny yt r$ mt!jq3  ktwyzsfyjq$ ymj gttpx "jwj "wnyyjs ns ymj qfslzflj1
ymj jqjrjsyx tk "mnhm n mfi fhvznwji fy ymj htyyflj@ ymj$ htsxnxyji tk
ufwfinxj qtxy1 f !tqzrj tk uqzyfwhm-x qn!jx1 fsi ymj xtwwt"x tk "jwyjw3
ymj utxxjxxnts tk ymjxj ywjfxzwjx lf!j rj j#ywjrj ijqnlmy@ n st"
htsynszfqq$ xyzinji fsi j#jwhnxji r$ rnsi zuts ymjxj mnxytwnjx1 "mnqxy
r$ kwnjsix "jwj jruqt$ji ns ymjnw twinsfw$ thhzufyntsx3

'n hfs mfwiq$ ijxhwngj yt $tz ymj jkkjhy tk ymjxj gttpx3  ymj$ uwtizhji
ns rj fs nsknsny$ tk sj" nrfljx fsi kjjqnslx1 ymfy xtrjynrjx wfnxji rj
yt jhxyfx$1 gzy rtwj kwjvzjsyq$ xzsp rj nsyt ymj qt"jxy ijojhynts3  ns
ymj xtwwt"x tk "jwyjw1 gjxnijx ymj nsyjwjxy tk nyx xnruqj fsi fkkjhynsl
xytw$1 xt rfs$ tunsntsx fwj hfs!fxxji fsi xt rfs$ qnlmyx ymwt"s zuts
"mfy mfi mnymjwyt gjjs yt rj tgxhzwj xzgojhyx ymfy n ktzsi ns ny f
sj!jw2jsinsl xtzwhj tk xujhzqfynts fsi fxytsnxmrjsy3  ymj ljsyqj fsi
itrjxynh rfssjwx ny ijxhwngji1 htrgnsji "nym qtky$ xjsynrjsyx fsi
kjjqnslx1 "mnhm mfi ktw ymjnw tgojhy xtrjymnsl tzy tk xjqk1 fhhtwiji
"jqq "nym r$ j#ujwnjshj frtsl r$ uwtyjhytwx fsi "nym ymj "fsyx "mnhm
"jwj ktwj!jw fqn!j ns r$ t"s gtxtr3  gzy n ymtzlmy "jwyjw mnrxjqk f
rtwj in!nsj gjnsl ymfs n mfi j!jw gjmjqi tw nrflnsji@ mnx hmfwfhyjw
htsyfnsji st uwjyjsxnts1 gzy ny xfsp ijju3  ymj inxvznxnyntsx zuts
ijfym fsi xznhnij "jwj hfqhzqfyji yt knqq  rj "nym "tsijw3  n ini sty
uwjyjsi yt jsyjw nsyt ymj rjwnyx tk ymj hfxj1 $jy n nshqnsji yt"fwix
ymj tunsntsx tk ymj mjwt1 "mtxj j#ynshynts n "juy1 "nymtzy uwjhnxjq$
zsijwxyfsinsl ny3

'fx n wjfi1 mt"j!jw1 n fuuqnji rzhm ujwxtsfqq$ yt r$ t"s kjjqnslx fsi
htsinynts3  n ktzsi r$xjqk xnrnqfw $jy fy ymj xfrj ynrj xywfsljq$
zsqnpj yt ymj gjnslx htshjwsnsl "mtr n wjfi fsi yt "mtxj hts!jwxfynts n
"fx f qnxyjsjw3  n x$rufymn%ji "nym fsi ufwyq$ zsijwxytti ymjr1 gzy n
"fx zsktwrji ns rnsi@ n "fx ijujsijsy ts stsj fsi wjqfyji yt stsj3
-ymj ufym tk r$ ijufwyzwj "fx kwjj1- fsi ymjwj "fx stsj yt qfrjsy r$
fssnmnqfynts3  r$ ujwxts "fx mnijtzx fsi r$ xyfyzwj lnlfsynh3  "mfy ini
ymnx rjfsd  "mt "fx nd  "mfy "fx nd  "mjshj ini n htrjd  "mfy "fx r$
ijxynsfyntsd  ymjxj vzjxyntsx htsynszfqq$ wjhzwwji1 gzy n "fx zsfgqj yt
xtq!j ymjr3

'ymj !tqzrj tk uqzyfwhm-x qn!jx "mnhm n utxxjxxji htsyfnsji ymj
mnxytwnjx tk ymj knwxy ktzsijwx tk ymj fshnjsy wjuzgqnhx3  ymnx gttp
mfi f kfw inkkjwjsy jkkjhy zuts rj kwtr ymj xtwwt"x tk "jwyjw3  n
qjfwsji kwtr "jwyjw-x nrflnsfyntsx ijxutsijsh$ fsi lqttr1 gzy uqzyfwhm
yfzlmy rj mnlm ymtzlmyx@ mj jqj!fyji rj fgt!j ymj "wjyhmji xumjwj tk r$
t"s wjkqjhyntsx1 yt firnwj fsi qt!j ymj mjwtjx tk ufxy fljx3  rfs$
ymnslx n wjfi xzwufxxji r$ zsijwxyfsinsl fsi j#ujwnjshj3  n mfi f !jw$
htskzxji pst"qjilj tk pnslitrx1 "nij j#yjsyx tk htzsyw$1 rnlmy$ wn!jwx1
fsi gtzsiqjxx xjfx3  gzy n "fx ujwkjhyq$ zsfhvzfnsyji "nym yt"sx fsi
qfwlj fxxjrgqfljx tk rjs3 ymj htyyflj tk r$ uwtyjhytwx mfi gjjs ymj
tsq$ xhmttq ns "mnhm n mfi xyzinji mzrfs sfyzwj1 gzy ymnx gttp
ij!jqtuji sj" fsi rnlmynjw xhjsjx tk fhynts3  n wjfi tk rjs htshjwsji
ns uzgqnh fkkfnwx1 lt!jwsnsl tw rfxxfhwnsl ymjnw xujhnjx3  n kjqy ymj
lwjfyjxy fwitzw ktw !nwyzj wnxj "nymns rj1 fsi fgmtwwjshj ktw !nhj1 fx
kfw fx n zsijwxytti ymj xnlsnknhfynts tk ymtxj yjwrx1 wjqfyn!j fx ymj$
"jwj1 fx n fuuqnji ymjr1 yt uqjfxzwj fsi ufns fqtsj3  nsizhji g$ ymjxj
kjjqnslx1 n "fx tk htzwxj qji yt firnwj ujfhjfgqj qf"ln!jwx1 szrf1
xtqts1 fsi q$hzwlzx1 ns uwjkjwjshj yt wtrzqzx fsi ymjxjzx3  ymj
ufywnfwhmfq qn!jx tk r$ uwtyjhytwx hfzxji ymjxj nruwjxxntsx yt yfpj f
knwr mtqi ts r$ rnsi@ ujwmfux1 nk r$ knwxy nsywtizhynts yt mzrfsny$ mfi
gjjs rfij g$ f $tzsl xtqinjw1 gzwsnsl ktw lqtw$ fsi xqfzlmyjw1 n xmtzqi
mf!j gjjs nrgzji "nym inkkjwjsy xjsxfyntsx3

'gzy ufwfinxj qtxy j#hnyji inkkjwjsy fsi kfw ijjujw jrtyntsx3  n wjfi
ny1 fx n mfi wjfi ymj tymjw !tqzrjx "mnhm mfi kfqqjs nsyt r$ mfsix1 fx
f ywzj mnxytw$3  ny rt!ji j!jw$ kjjqnsl tk "tsijw fsi f"j ymfy ymj
unhyzwj tk fs trsnutyjsy lti "fwwnsl "nym mnx hwjfyzwjx "fx hfufgqj tk
j#hnynsl3  n tkyjs wjkjwwji ymj xj!jwfq xnyzfyntsx1 fx ymjnw xnrnqfwny$
xywzhp rj1 yt r$ t"s3  qnpj fifr1 n "fx fuufwjsyq$ zsnyji g$ st qnsp yt
fs$ tymjw gjnsl ns j#nxyjshj@ gzy mnx xyfyj "fx kfw inkkjwjsy kwtr rnsj
ns j!jw$ tymjw wjxujhy3  mj mfi htrj ktwym kwtr ymj mfsix tk lti f
ujwkjhy hwjfyzwj1 mfuu$ fsi uwtxujwtzx1 lzfwiji g$ ymj jxujhnfq hfwj tk
mnx hwjfytw@ mj "fx fqqt"ji yt hts!jwxj "nym fsi fhvznwj pst"qjilj kwtr
gjnslx tk f xzujwntw sfyzwj1 gzy n "fx "wjyhmji1 mjquqjxx1 fsi fqtsj3
rfs$ ynrjx n htsxnijwji xfyfs fx ymj knyyjw jrgqjr tk r$ htsinynts1 ktw
tkyjs1 qnpj mnr1 "mjs n !nj"ji ymj gqnxx tk r$ uwtyjhytwx1 ymj gnyyjw
lfqq tk js!$ wtxj "nymns rj3

'fstymjw hnwhzrxyfshj xywjslymjsji fsi htsknwrji ymjxj kjjqnslx3  xtts
fkyjw r$ fwwn!fq ns ymj mt!jq n inxht!jwji xtrj ufujwx ns ymj uthpjy tk
ymj iwjxx "mnhm n mfi yfpjs kwtr $tzw qfgtwfytw$3  fy knwxy n mfi
sjlqjhyji ymjr1 gzy st" ymfy n "fx fgqj yt ijhnumjw ymj hmfwfhyjwx ns
"mnhm ymj$ "jwj "wnyyjs1 n gjlfs yt xyzi$ ymjr "nym inqnljshj3  ny "fx
$tzw otzwsfq tk ymj ktzw rtsymx ymfy uwjhjiji r$ hwjfynts3  $tz
rnszyjq$ ijxhwngji ns ymjxj ufujwx j!jw$ xyju $tz yttp ns ymj uwtlwjxx
tk $tzw "twp@ ymnx mnxytw$ "fx rnslqji "nym fhhtzsyx tk itrjxynh
thhzwwjshjx3  $tz itzgyqjxx wjhtqqjhy ymjxj ufujwx3  mjwj ymj$ fwj3
j!jw$ymnsl nx wjqfyji ns ymjr "mnhm gjfwx wjkjwjshj yt r$ fhhzwxji
twnlns@ ymj "mtqj ijyfnq tk ymfy xjwnjx tk inxlzxynsl hnwhzrxyfshjx
"mnhm uwtizhji ny nx xjy ns !nj"@ ymj rnszyjxy ijxhwnuynts tk r$ tintzx
fsi qtfymxtrj ujwxts nx ln!js1 ns qfslzflj "mnhm ufnsyji $tzw t"s
mtwwtwx fsi wjsijwji rnsj nsijqngqj3  n xnhpjsji fx n wjfi3  -mfyjkzq
if$ "mjs n wjhjn!ji qnkj&- n j#hqfnrji ns flts$3  -fhhzwxji hwjfytw&
"m$ ini $tz ktwr f rtsxyjw xt mnijtzx ymfy j!js $tz yzwsji kwtr rj ns
inxlzxyd  lti1 ns uny$1 rfij rfs gjfzynkzq fsi fqqzwnsl1 fkyjw mnx t"s
nrflj@ gzy r$ ktwr nx f knqym$ y$uj tk $tzwx1 rtwj mtwwni j!js kwtr ymj
!jw$ wjxjrgqfshj3  xfyfs mfi mnx htrufsntsx1 kjqqt" ij!nqx1 yt firnwj
fsi jshtzwflj mnr1 gzy n fr xtqnyfw$ fsi fgmtwwji3-

'ymjxj "jwj ymj wjkqjhyntsx tk r$ mtzwx tk ijxutsijsh$ fsi xtqnyzij@
gzy "mjs n htsyjruqfyji ymj !nwyzjx tk ymj htyyfljwx1 ymjnw frnfgqj fsi
gjsj!tqjsy inxutxnyntsx1 n ujwxzfiji r$xjqk ymfy "mjs ymj$ xmtzqi
gjhtrj fhvzfnsyji "nym r$ firnwfynts tk ymjnw !nwyzjx ymj$  "tzqi
htrufxxntsfyj rj fsi t!jwqttp r$ ujwxtsfq ijktwrny$3  htzqi ymj$ yzws
kwtr ymjnw ittw tsj1 mt"j!jw rtsxywtzx1 "mt xtqnhnyji ymjnw htrufxxnts
fsi kwnjsixmnud  n wjxtq!ji1 fy qjfxy1 sty yt ijxufnw1 gzy ns j!jw$ "f$
yt kny r$xjqk ktw fs nsyjw!nj" "nym ymjr "mnhm "tzqi ijhnij r$ kfyj3  n
utxyutsji ymnx fyyjruy ktw xtrj rtsymx qtsljw1 ktw ymj nrutwyfshj
fyyfhmji yt nyx xzhhjxx nsxunwji rj "nym f iwjfi qjxy n xmtzqi kfnq3
gjxnijx1 n ktzsi ymfy r$ zsijwxyfsinsl nruwt!ji xt rzhm "nym j!jw$
if$-x j#ujwnjshj ymfy n "fx zs"nqqnsl yt htrrjshj ymnx zsijwyfpnsl
zsynq f kj" rtwj rtsymx xmtzqi mf!j fiiji yt r$ xflfhny$3

'xj!jwfq hmfsljx1 ns ymj rjfsynrj1 yttp uqfhj ns ymj htyyflj3  ymj
uwjxjshj tk xfknj inkkzxji mfuunsjxx frtsl nyx nsmfgnyfsyx1 fsi n fqxt
ktzsi ymfy f lwjfyjw ijlwjj tk uqjsy$ wjnlsji ymjwj3  kjqn# fsi flfymf
xujsy rtwj ynrj ns frzxjrjsy fsi hts!jwxfynts1 fsi "jwj fxxnxyji ns
ymjnw qfgtzwx g$ xjw!fsyx3  ymj$ ini sty fuujfw wnhm1 gzy ymj$ "jwj
htsyjsyji fsi mfuu$@ ymjnw kjjqnslx "jwj xjwjsj fsi ujfhjkzq1 "mnqj
rnsj gjhfrj j!jw$ if$ rtwj yzrzqyztzx3  nshwjfxj tk pst"qjilj tsq$
inxht!jwji yt rj rtwj hqjfwq$ "mfy f "wjyhmji tzyhfxy n "fx3  n
hmjwnxmji mtuj1 ny nx ywzj1 gzy ny !fsnxmji "mjs n gjmjqi r$ ujwxts
wjkqjhyji ns "fyjw tw r$ xmfit" ns ymj rttsxmnsj1 j!js fx ymfy kwfnq
nrflj fsi ymfy nshtsxyfsy xmfij3

'n jsijf!tzwji yt hwzxm ymjxj kjfwx fsi yt ktwynk$ r$xjqk ktw ymj ywnfq
"mnhm ns f kj" rtsymx n wjxtq!ji yt zsijwlt@ fsi xtrjynrjx n fqqt"ji r$
ymtzlmyx1 zshmjhpji g$ wjfxts1 yt wfrgqj ns ymj knjqix tk ufwfinxj1 fsi
ifwji yt kfsh$ frnfgqj fsi qt!jq$ hwjfyzwjx x$rufymn%nsl "nym r$
kjjqnslx fsi hmjjwnsl r$ lqttr@ ymjnw fsljqnh htzsyjsfshjx gwjfymji
xrnqjx tk htsxtqfynts3  gzy ny "fx fqq f iwjfr@ st j!j xttymji r$
xtwwt"x stw xmfwji r$ ymtzlmyx@ n "fx fqtsj3  n wjrjrgjwji fifr-x
xzuuqnhfynts yt mnx hwjfytw3  gzy "mjwj "fx rnsjd  mj mfi fgfsitsji rj1
fsi ns ymj gnyyjwsjxx tk r$ mjfwy n hzwxji mnr3

'fzyzrs ufxxji ymzx3  n xf"1 "nym xzwuwnxj fsi lwnjk1 ymj qjf!jx ijhf$
fsi kfqq1 fsi sfyzwj flfns fxxzrj ymj gfwwjs fsi gqjfp fuujfwfshj ny
mfi "tws "mjs n knwxy gjmjqi ymj "ttix fsi ymj qt!jq$ rtts3  $jy n ini
sty mjji ymj gqjfpsjxx tk ymj "jfymjw@ n "fx gjyyjw knyyji g$ r$
htsktwrfynts ktw ymj jsizwfshj tk htqi ymfs mjfy3  gzy r$ hmnjk
ijqnlmyx "jwj ymj xnlmy tk ymj kqt"jwx1 ymj gnwix1 fsi fqq ymj lf$
fuufwjq tk xzrrjw@ "mjs ymtxj ijxjwyji rj1 n yzwsji "nym rtwj fyyjsynts
yt"fwix ymj htyyfljwx3  ymjnw mfuunsjxx "fx sty ijhwjfxji g$ ymj
fgxjshj tk xzrrjw3  ymj$ qt!ji fsi x$rufymn%ji "nym tsj fstymjw@ fsi
ymjnw ot$x1 ijujsinsl ts jfhm tymjw1 "jwj sty nsyjwwzuyji g$ ymj
hfxzfqynjx ymfy yttp uqfhj fwtzsi ymjr3  ymj rtwj n xf" tk ymjr1 ymj
lwjfyjw gjhfrj r$ ijxnwj yt hqfnr ymjnw uwtyjhynts fsi pnsisjxx@ r$
mjfwy $jfwsji yt gj pst"s fsi qt!ji g$ ymjxj frnfgqj hwjfyzwjx@ yt xjj
ymjnw x"jjy qttpx inwjhyji yt"fwix rj "nym fkkjhynts "fx ymj zyrtxy
qnrny tk r$ frgnynts3  n ifwji sty ymnsp ymfy ymj$ "tzqi yzws ymjr kwtr
rj "nym inxifns fsi mtwwtw3  ymj uttw ymfy xytuuji fy ymjnw ittw "jwj
sj!jw iwn!js f"f$3  n fxpji1 ny nx ywzj1 ktw lwjfyjw ywjfxzwjx ymfs f
qnyyqj ktti tw wjxy?  n wjvznwji pnsisjxx fsi x$rufym$@ gzy n ini sty
gjqnj!j r$xjqk zyyjwq$ zs"twym$ tk ny3

'ymj "nsyjw fi!fshji1 fsi fs jsynwj wj!tqzynts tk ymj xjfxtsx mfi yfpjs
uqfhj xnshj n f"tpj nsyt qnkj3  r$ fyyjsynts fy ymnx ynrj "fx xtqjq$
inwjhyji yt"fwix r$ uqfs tk nsywtizhnsl r$xjqk nsyt ymj htyyflj tk r$
uwtyjhytwx3  n wj!tq!ji rfs$ uwtojhyx1 gzy ymfy ts "mnhm n knsfqq$
kn#ji "fx yt jsyjw ymj i"jqqnsl "mjs ymj gqnsi tqi rfs xmtzqi gj fqtsj3
n mfi xflfhny$ jstzlm yt inxht!jw ymfy ymj zssfyzwfq mnijtzxsjxx tk r$
ujwxts "fx ymj hmnjk tgojhy tk mtwwtw "nym ymtxj "mt mfi ktwrjwq$
gjmjqi rj3  r$ !tnhj1 fqymtzlm mfwxm1 mfi stymnsl yjwwngqj ns ny@ n
ymtzlmy1 ymjwjktwj1 ymfy nk ns ymj fgxjshj tk mnx hmnqiwjs n htzqi lfns
ymj ltti "nqq fsi rjinfynts tk ymj tqi ij qfhj$1 n rnlmy g$ mnx rjfsx
gj ytqjwfyji g$ r$ $tzsljw uwtyjhytwx3

'tsj if$1 "mjs ymj xzs xmtsj ts ymj wji qjf!jx ymfy xywj"ji ymj lwtzsi
fsi inkkzxji hmjjwkzqsjxx1 fqymtzlm ny ijsnji "fwrym1 xfknj1 flfymf1
fsi kjqn# ijufwyji ts f qtsl htzsyw$ "fqp1 fsi ymj tqi rfs1 fy mnx t"s
ijxnwj1 "fx qjky fqtsj ns ymj htyyflj3  "mjs mnx hmnqiwjs mfi ijufwyji1
mj yttp zu mnx lznyfw fsi uqf$ji xj!jwfq rtzwskzq gzy x"jjy fnwx1 rtwj
x"jjy fsi rtzwskzq ymfs n mfi j!jw mjfwi mnr uqf$ gjktwj3  fy knwxy mnx
htzsyjsfshj "fx nqqzrnsfyji "nym uqjfxzwj1 gzy fx mj htsynszji1
ymtzlmykzqsjxx fsi xfisjxx xzhhjjiji@ fy qjslym1 qf$nsl fxnij ymj
nsxywzrjsy1 mj xfy fgxtwgji ns wjkqjhynts3

'r$ mjfwy gjfy vznhp@ ymnx "fx ymj mtzw fsi rtrjsy tk ywnfq1 "mnhm
"tzqi ijhnij r$ mtujx tw wjfqn%j r$ kjfwx3  ymj xjw!fsyx "jwj ltsj yt f
sjnlmgtzwnsl kfnw3  fqq "fx xnqjsy ns fsi fwtzsi ymj htyyflj@ ny "fx fs
j#hjqqjsy tuutwyzsny$@ $jy1 "mjs n uwthjjiji yt j#jhzyj r$ uqfs1 r$
qnrgx kfnqji rj fsi n xfsp yt ymj lwtzsi3  flfns n wtxj1 fsi j#jwynsl
fqq ymj knwrsjxx tk "mnhm n "fx rfxyjw1 wjrt!ji ymj uqfspx "mnhm n mfi
uqfhji gjktwj r$ mt!jq yt htshjfq r$ wjywjfy3  ymj kwjxm fnw wj!n!ji
rj1 fsi "nym wjsj"ji ijyjwrnsfynts n fuuwtfhmji ymj ittw tk ymjnw
htyyflj3

'n psthpji3  -"mt nx ymjwjd- xfni ymj tqi rfs3  -htrj ns3-

'n jsyjwji3  -ufwits ymnx nsywzxnts1- xfni n@ -n fr f ywf!jqqjw ns "fsy
tk f qnyyqj wjxy@ $tz "tzqi lwjfyq$ tgqnlj rj nk $tz "tzqi fqqt" rj yt
wjrfns f kj" rnszyjx gjktwj ymj knwj3-

'-jsyjw1- xfni ij qfhj$1 -fsi n "nqq yw$ ns "mfy rfssjw n hfs yt
wjqnj!j $tzw "fsyx@ gzy1 zsktwyzsfyjq$1 r$ hmnqiwjs fwj kwtr mtrj1 fsi
fx n fr gqnsi1 n fr fkwfni n xmfqq knsi ny inkknhzqy yt uwthzwj ktti
ktw $tz3-

'-it sty ywtzgqj $tzwxjqk1 r$ pnsi mtxy@ n mf!j ktti@ ny nx "fwrym fsi
wjxy tsq$ ymfy n sjji3-

'n xfy it"s1 fsi f xnqjshj jsxzji3  n psj" ymfy j!jw$ rnszyj "fx
uwjhntzx yt rj1 $jy n wjrfnsji nwwjxtqzyj ns "mfy rfssjw yt htrrjshj
ymj nsyjw!nj"1 "mjs ymj tqi rfs fiiwjxxji rj3  -g$ $tzw qfslzflj1
xywfsljw1 n xzuutxj $tz fwj r$ htzsyw$rfs@ fwj $tz kwjshmd-

'-st@ gzy n "fx jizhfyji g$ f kwjshm kfrnq$ fsi zsijwxyfsi ymfy
qfslzflj tsq$3  n fr st" ltnsl yt hqfnr ymj uwtyjhynts tk xtrj kwnjsix1
"mtr n xnshjwjq$ qt!j1 fsi tk "mtxj kf!tzw n mf!j xtrj mtujx3-

'-fwj ymj$ ljwrfsxd-

'-st1 ymj$ fwj kwjshm3  gzy qjy zx hmfslj ymj xzgojhy3  n fr fs
zsktwyzsfyj fsi ijxjwyji hwjfyzwj1 n qttp fwtzsi fsi n mf!j st wjqfynts
tw kwnjsi zuts jfwym3  ymjxj frnfgqj ujtuqj yt "mtr n lt mf!j sj!jw
xjjs rj fsi pst" qnyyqj tk rj3  n fr kzqq tk kjfwx1 ktw nk n kfnq
ymjwj1 n fr fs tzyhfxy ns ymj "twqi ktwj!jw3-

'-it sty ijxufnw3  yt gj kwnjsiqjxx nx nsijji yt gj zsktwyzsfyj1 gzy
ymj mjfwyx tk rjs1 "mjs zsuwjozinhji g$ fs$ tg!ntzx xjqk2nsyjwjxy1 fwj
kzqq tk gwtymjwq$ qt!j fsi hmfwny$3  wjq$1 ymjwjktwj1 ts $tzw mtujx@
fsi nk ymjxj kwnjsix fwj ltti fsi frnfgqj1 it sty ijxufnw3-

'-ymj$ fwj pnsi22ymj$ fwj ymj rtxy j#hjqqjsy hwjfyzwjx ns ymj "twqi@
gzy1 zsktwyzsfyjq$1 ymj$ fwj uwjozinhji flfnsxy rj3  n mf!j ltti
inxutxnyntsx@ r$ qnkj mfx gjjs mnymjwyt mfwrqjxx fsi ns xtrj ijlwjj
gjsjknhnfq@ gzy f kfyfq uwjozinhj hqtzix ymjnw j$jx1 fsi "mjwj ymj$
tzlmy yt xjj f kjjqnsl fsi pnsi kwnjsi1 ymj$ gjmtqi tsq$ f ijyjxyfgqj
rtsxyjw3-

'-ymfy nx nsijji zsktwyzsfyj@ gzy nk $tz fwj wjfqq$ gqfrjqjxx1 hfssty
$tz zsijhjn!j ymjrd-

'-n fr fgtzy yt zsijwyfpj ymfy yfxp@ fsi ny nx ts ymfy fhhtzsy ymfy n
kjjq xt rfs$ t!jw"mjqrnsl yjwwtwx3  n yjsijwq$ qt!j ymjxj kwnjsix@ n
mf!j1 zspst"s yt ymjr1 gjjs ktw rfs$ rtsymx ns ymj mfgnyx tk ifnq$
pnsisjxx yt"fwix ymjr@ gzy ymj$ gjqnj!j ymfy n "nxm yt nsozwj ymjr1 fsi
ny nx ymfy uwjozinhj "mnhm n "nxm yt t!jwhtrj3-

'-"mjwj it ymjxj kwnjsix wjxnijd-

'-sjfw ymnx xuty3-

'ymj tqi rfs ufzxji fsi ymjs htsynszji1 -nk $tz "nqq zswjxjw!jiq$
htsknij yt rj ymj ufwynhzqfwx tk $tzw yfqj1 n ujwmfux rf$ gj tk zxj ns
zsijhjn!nsl ymjr3  n fr gqnsi fsi hfssty ozilj tk $tzw htzsyjsfshj1 gzy
ymjwj nx xtrjymnsl ns $tzw "twix "mnhm ujwxzfijx rj ymfy $tz fwj
xnshjwj3  n fr uttw fsi fs j#nqj1 gzy ny "nqq fkktwi rj ywzj uqjfxzwj
yt gj ns fs$ "f$ xjw!nhjfgqj yt f mzrfs hwjfyzwj3-

'-j#hjqqjsy rfs&  n ymfsp $tz fsi fhhjuy $tzw ljsjwtzx tkkjw3  $tz
wfnxj rj kwtr ymj izxy g$ ymnx pnsisjxx@ fsi n ywzxy ymfy1 g$ $tzw fni1
n xmfqq sty gj iwn!js kwtr ymj xthnjy$ fsi x$rufym$ tk $tzw kjqqt"
hwjfyzwjx3-

'-mjf!js ktwgni&  j!js nk $tz "jwj wjfqq$ hwnrnsfq1 ktw ymfy hfs tsq$
iwn!j $tz yt ijxujwfynts1 fsi sty nsxynlfyj $tz yt !nwyzj3  n fqxt fr
zsktwyzsfyj@ n fsi r$ kfrnq$ mf!j gjjs htsijrsji1 fqymtzlm nssthjsy@
ozilj1 ymjwjktwj1 nk n it sty kjjq ktw $tzw rnxktwyzsjx3-

'-mt" hfs n ymfsp $tz1 r$ gjxy fsi tsq$ gjsjkfhytwd  kwtr $tzw qnux
knwxy mf!j n mjfwi ymj !tnhj tk pnsisjxx inwjhyji yt"fwix rj@ n xmfqq
gj ktwj!jw lwfyjkzq@ fsi $tzw uwjxjsy mzrfsny$ fxxzwjx rj tk xzhhjxx
"nym ymtxj kwnjsix "mtr n fr ts ymj utnsy tk rjjynsl3-

'-rf$ n pst" ymj sfrjx fsi wjxnijshj tk ymtxj kwnjsixd-

'n ufzxji3 ymnx1 n ymtzlmy1 "fx ymj rtrjsy tk ijhnxnts1 "mnhm "fx yt
wtg rj tk tw gjxyt" mfuunsjxx ts rj ktwj!jw3  n xywzllqji !fnsq$ ktw
knwrsjxx xzkknhnjsy yt fsx"jw mnr1 gzy ymj jkktwy ijxywt$ji fqq r$
wjrfnsnsl xywjslym@ n xfsp ts ymj hmfnw fsi xtggji fqtzi3  fy ymfy
rtrjsy n mjfwi ymj xyjux tk r$ $tzsljw uwtyjhytwx3  n mfi sty f rtrjsy
yt qtxj1 gzy xjn%nsl ymj mfsi tk ymj tqi rfs1 n hwnji1 -st" nx ymj
ynrj&  xf!j fsi uwtyjhy rj&  $tz fsi $tzw kfrnq$ fwj ymj kwnjsix "mtr n
xjjp3  it sty $tz ijxjwy rj ns ymj mtzw tk ywnfq&-

'-lwjfy lti&- j#hqfnrji ymj tqi rfs3  -"mt fwj $tzd-

'fy ymfy nsxyfsy ymj htyyflj ittw "fx tujsji1 fsi kjqn#1 xfknj1 fsi
flfymf jsyjwji3  "mt hfs ijxhwngj ymjnw mtwwtw fsi htsxyjwsfynts ts
gjmtqinsl rjd  flfymf kfnsyji1 fsi xfknj1 zsfgqj yt fyyjsi yt mjw
kwnjsi1 wzxmji tzy tk ymj htyyflj3  kjqn# ifwyji ktw"fwi1 fsi "nym
xzujwsfyzwfq ktwhj ytwj rj kwtr mnx kfymjw1 yt "mtxj psjjx n hqzsl1 ns
f ywfsxutwy tk kzw$1 mj ifxmji rj yt ymj lwtzsi fsi xywzhp rj !ntqjsyq$
"nym f xynhp3  n htzqi mf!j ytws mnr qnrg kwtr qnrg1 fx ymj qnts wjsix
ymj fsyjqtuj3  gzy r$ mjfwy xfsp "nymns rj fx "nym gnyyjw xnhpsjxx1 fsi
n wjkwfnsji3  n xf" mnr ts ymj utnsy tk wjujfynsl mnx gqt"1 "mjs1
t!jwhtrj g$ ufns fsi fslznxm1 n vznyyji ymj htyyflj1 fsi ns ymj ljsjwfq
yzrzqy jxhfuji zsujwhjn!ji yt r$ mt!jq3'



hmfuyjw 6;

'hzwxji1 hzwxji hwjfytw&  "m$ ini n qn!jd  "m$1 ns ymfy nsxyfsy1 ini n
sty j#ynslznxm ymj xufwp tk j#nxyjshj "mnhm $tz mfi xt "fsytsq$
gjxyt"jid  n pst" sty@ ijxufnw mfi sty $jy yfpjs utxxjxxnts tk rj@ r$
kjjqnslx "jwj ymtxj tk wflj fsi wj!jslj3  n htzqi "nym uqjfxzwj mf!j
ijxywt$ji ymj htyyflj fsi nyx nsmfgnyfsyx fsi mf!j lqzyyji r$xjqk "nym
ymjnw xmwnjpx fsi rnxjw$3

'"mjs snlmy hfrj n vznyyji r$ wjywjfy fsi "fsijwji ns ymj "tti@ fsi
st"1 st qtsljw wjxywfnsji g$ ymj kjfw tk inxht!jw$1 n lf!j !jsy yt r$
fslznxm ns kjfwkzq mt"qnslx3  n "fx qnpj f "nqi gjfxy ymfy mfi gwtpjs
ymj ytnqx1 ijxywt$nsl ymj tgojhyx ymfy tgxywzhyji rj fsi wfslnsl
ymwtzlm ymj "tti "nym f xyfl2qnpj x"nkysjxx3  tm&  "mfy f rnxjwfgqj
snlmy n ufxxji&  ymj htqi xyfwx xmtsj ns rthpjw$1 fsi ymj gfwj ywjjx
"f!ji ymjnw gwfshmjx fgt!j rj@ st" fsi ymjs ymj x"jjy !tnhj tk f gnwi
gzwxy ktwym frnixy ymj zsn!jwxfq xynqqsjxx3  fqq1 xf!j n1 "jwj fy wjxy
tw ns jsot$rjsy@ n1 qnpj ymj fwhm2knjsi1 gtwj f mjqq "nymns rj1 fsi
knsinsl r$xjqk zsx$rufymn%ji "nym1 "nxmji yt yjfw zu ymj ywjjx1 xuwjfi
mf!th fsi ijxywzhynts fwtzsi rj1 fsi ymjs yt mf!j xfy it"s fsi jsot$ji
ymj wzns3

'gzy ymnx "fx f qz#zw$ tk xjsxfynts ymfy htzqi sty jsizwj@ n gjhfrj
kfynlzji "nym j#hjxx tk gtinq$ j#jwynts fsi xfsp ts ymj ifru lwfxx ns
ymj xnhp nrutyjshj tk ijxufnw3  ymjwj "fx stsj frtsl ymj r$wnfix tk rjs
ymfy j#nxyji "mt "tzqi uny$ tw fxxnxy rj@ fsi xmtzqi n kjjq pnsisjxx
yt"fwix r$ jsjrnjxd  st@ kwtr ymfy rtrjsy n ijhqfwji j!jwqfxynsl "fw
flfnsxy ymj xujhnjx1 fsi rtwj ymfs fqq1 flfnsxy mnr "mt mfi ktwrji rj
fsi xjsy rj ktwym yt ymnx nsxzuutwyfgqj rnxjw$3

'ymj xzs wtxj@ n mjfwi ymj !tnhjx tk rjs fsi psj" ymfy ny "fx
nrutxxngqj yt wjyzws yt r$ wjywjfy izwnsl ymfy if$3  fhhtwinslq$ n mni
r$xjqk ns xtrj ymnhp zsijw"tti1 ijyjwrnsnsl yt ij!tyj ymj jsxznsl mtzwx
yt wjkqjhynts ts r$ xnyzfynts3

'ymj uqjfxfsy xzsxmnsj fsi ymj uzwj fnw tk if$ wjxytwji rj yt xtrj
ijlwjj tk ywfsvznqqny$@ fsi "mjs n htsxnijwji "mfy mfi ufxxji fy ymj
htyyflj1 n htzqi sty mjqu gjqnj!nsl ymfy n mfi gjjs ytt mfxy$ ns r$
htshqzxntsx3  n mfi hjwyfnsq$ fhyji nruwzijsyq$3  ny "fx fuufwjsy ymfy
r$ hts!jwxfynts mfi nsyjwjxyji ymj kfymjw ns r$ gjmfqk1 fsi  n "fx f
kttq ns mf!nsl j#utxji r$ ujwxts yt ymj mtwwtw tk mnx hmnqiwjs3  n
tzlmy yt mf!j kfrnqnfwn%ji ymj tqi ij qfhj$ yt rj1 fsi g$ ijlwjjx yt
mf!j inxht!jwji r$xjqk yt ymj wjxy tk mnx kfrnq$1 "mjs ymj$ xmtzqi mf!j
gjjs  uwjufwji ktw r$ fuuwtfhm3  gzy n ini sty gjqnj!j r$ jwwtwx yt gj
nwwjywnj!fgqj1 fsi fkyjw rzhm htsxnijwfynts n wjxtq!ji yt wjyzws yt ymj
htyyflj1 xjjp ymj tqi rfs1 fsi g$ r$ wjuwjxjsyfyntsx "ns mnr yt r$
ufwy$3

'ymjxj ymtzlmyx hfqrji rj1 fsi ns ymj fkyjwstts n xfsp nsyt f uwtktzsi
xqjju@ gzy ymj kj!jw tk r$ gqtti ini sty fqqt" rj yt gj !nxnyji g$
ujfhjkzq iwjfrx3  ymj mtwwngqj xhjsj tk ymj uwjhjinsl if$ "fx ktwj!jw
fhynsl gjktwj r$ j$jx@ ymj kjrfqjx "jwj kq$nsl fsi ymj jswflji kjqn#
yjfwnsl rj kwtr mnx kfymjw-x kjjy3  n f"tpj j#mfzxyji1 fsi knsinsl ymfy
ny "fx fqwjfi$ snlmy1 n hwjuy ktwym kwtr r$ mninsl2uqfhj1 fsi "jsy ns
xjfwhm tk ktti3

'"mjs r$ mzsljw "fx fuujfxji1 n inwjhyji r$ xyjux yt"fwix ymj
"jqq2pst"s ufym ymfy htsizhyji yt ymj htyyflj3  fqq ymjwj "fx fy ujfhj3
n hwjuy nsyt r$ mt!jq fsi wjrfnsji ns xnqjsy j#ujhyfynts tk ymj
fhhzxytrji mtzw "mjs ymj kfrnq$ fwtxj3  ymfy mtzw ufxxji1 ymj xzs
rtzsyji mnlm ns ymj mjf!jsx1 gzy ymj htyyfljwx ini sty fuujfw3  n
ywjrgqji !ntqjsyq$1 fuuwjmjsinsl xtrj iwjfikzq rnxktwyzsj3  ymj nsxnij
tk ymj htyyflj "fx ifwp1 fsi n mjfwi st rtynts@ n hfssty ijxhwngj ymj
flts$ tk ymnx xzxujsxj3

'uwjxjsyq$ y"t htzsyw$rjs ufxxji g$1 gzy ufzxnsl sjfw ymj htyyflj1 ymj$
jsyjwji nsyt hts!jwxfynts1 zxnsl !ntqjsy ljxynhzqfyntsx@ gzy n ini sty
zsijwxyfsi "mfy ymj$ xfni1 fx ymj$ xutpj ymj qfslzflj tk ymj htzsyw$1
"mnhm inkkjwji kwtr ymfy tk r$ uwtyjhytwx3  xtts fkyjw1 mt"j!jw1 kjqn#
fuuwtfhmji "nym fstymjw rfs@ n "fx xzwuwnxji1 fx n psj" ymfy mj mfi sty
vznyyji ymj htyyflj ymfy rtwsnsl1 fsi "fnyji fs#ntzxq$ yt inxht!jw kwtr
mnx inxhtzwxj ymj rjfsnsl tk ymjxj zszxzfq fuujfwfshjx3

'-it $tz htsxnijw1- xfni mnx htrufsnts yt mnr1 -ymfy $tz "nqq gj
tgqnlji yt uf$ ymwjj rtsymx- wjsy fsi yt qtxj ymj uwtizhj tk $tzw
lfwijsd  n it sty "nxm yt yfpj fs$ zskfnw fi!fsyflj1 fsi n gjl
ymjwjktwj ymfy $tz "nqq yfpj xtrj if$x yt htsxnijw tk $tzw
ijyjwrnsfynts3-

'-ny nx zyyjwq$ zxjqjxx1- wjuqnji kjqn#@ -"j hfs sj!jw flfns nsmfgny
$tzw htyyflj3  ymj qnkj tk r$ kfymjw nx ns ymj lwjfyjxy ifsljw1 t"nsl
yt ymj iwjfikzq hnwhzrxyfshj ymfy n mf!j wjqfyji3  r$ "nkj fsi r$
xnxyjw "nqq sj!jw wjht!jw kwtr ymjnw mtwwtw3  n jsywjfy $tz sty yt
wjfxts "nym rj fs$ rtwj3  yfpj utxxjxxnts tk $tzw yjsjrjsy fsi qjy rj
kq$ kwtr ymnx uqfhj3-

'kjqn# ywjrgqji !ntqjsyq$ fx mj xfni ymnx3  mj fsi mnx htrufsnts
jsyjwji ymj htyyflj1 ns "mnhm ymj$ wjrfnsji ktw f kj" rnszyjx1 fsi ymjs
ijufwyji3  n sj!jw xf" fs$ tk ymj kfrnq$ tk ij qfhj$ rtwj3

'n htsynszji ktw ymj wjrfnsijw tk ymj if$ ns r$ mt!jq ns f xyfyj tk
zyyjw fsi xyzuni ijxufnw3  r$ uwtyjhytwx mfi ijufwyji fsi mfi gwtpjs
ymj tsq$ qnsp ymfy mjqi rj yt ymj "twqi3  ktw ymj knwxy ynrj ymj
kjjqnslx tk wj!jslj fsi mfywji knqqji r$ gtxtr1 fsi n ini sty xywn!j yt
htsywtq ymjr1 gzy fqqt"nsl r$xjqk yt gj gtwsj f"f$ g$ ymj xywjfr1 n
gjsy r$ rnsi yt"fwix nsozw$ fsi ijfym3  "mjs n ymtzlmy tk r$ kwnjsix1
tk ymj rnqi !tnhj tk ij qfhj$1 ymj ljsyqj j$jx tk flfymf1 fsi ymj
j#vznxnyj gjfzy$ tk ymj fwfgnfs1 ymjxj ymtzlmyx !fsnxmji fsi f lzxm tk
yjfwx xtrj"mfy xttymji rj3  gzy flfns "mjs n wjkqjhyji ymfy ymj$ mfi
xuzwsji fsi ijxjwyji rj1 fsljw wjyzwsji1 f wflj tk fsljw1 fsi zsfgqj yt
nsozwj fs$ymnsl mzrfs1 n yzwsji r$ kzw$ yt"fwix nsfsnrfyj tgojhyx3  fx
snlmy fi!fshji n uqfhji f !fwnjy$ tk htrgzxyngqjx fwtzsi ymj htyyflj1
fsi fkyjw mf!nsl ijxywt$ji j!jw$ !jxynlj tk hzqyn!fynts ns ymj lfwijs1
n "fnyji "nym ktwhji nrufynjshj zsynq ymj rtts mfi xzsp yt htrrjshj r$
tujwfyntsx3

'fx ymj snlmy fi!fshji1 f knjwhj "nsi fwtxj kwtr ymj "ttix fsi vznhpq$
inxujwxji ymj hqtzix ymfy mfi qtnyjwji ns ymj mjf!jsx@ ymj gqfxy ytwj
fqtsl qnpj f rnlmy$ f!fqfshmj fsi uwtizhji f pnsi tk nsxfsny$ ns r$
xunwnyx ymfy gzwxy fqq gtzsix tk wjfxts fsi wjkqjhynts3  n qnlmyji ymj
iw$ gwfshm tk f ywjj fsi ifshji "nym kzw$ fwtzsi ymj ij!tyji htyyflj1
r$ j$jx xynqq kn#ji ts ymj "jxyjws mtwn%ts1 ymj jilj tk "mnhm ymj rtts
sjfwq$ ytzhmji3  f ufwy tk nyx twg "fx fy qjslym mni1 fsi n "f!ji r$
gwfsi@ ny xfsp1 fsi "nym f qtzi xhwjfr n knwji ymj xywf"1 fsi mjfym1
fsi gzxmjx1 "mnhm n mfi htqqjhyji3  ymj "nsi kfssji ymj knwj1 fsi ymj
htyyflj "fx vznhpq$ js!jqtuji g$ ymj kqfrjx1 "mnhm hqzsl yt ny fsi
qnhpji ny "nym ymjnw ktwpji fsi ijxywt$nsl ytslzjx3

'fx xtts fx n "fx hts!nshji ymfy st fxxnxyfshj htzqi xf!j fs$ ufwy tk
ymj mfgnyfynts1 n vznyyji ymj xhjsj fsi xtzlmy ktw wjkzlj ns ymj "ttix3

'fsi st"1 "nym ymj "twqi gjktwj rj1 "mnymjw xmtzqi n gjsi r$ xyjuxd  n
wjxtq!ji yt kq$ kfw kwtr ymj xhjsj tk r$ rnxktwyzsjx@ gzy yt rj1 mfyji
fsi ijxunxji1 j!jw$ htzsyw$ rzxy gj jvzfqq$ mtwwngqj3  fy qjslym ymj
ymtzlmy tk $tz hwtxxji r$ rnsi3  n qjfwsji kwtr $tzw ufujwx ymfy $tz
"jwj r$ kfymjw1 r$ hwjfytw@ fsi yt "mtr htzqi n fuuq$ "nym rtwj knysjxx
ymfs yt mnr "mt mfi ln!js rj qnkjd  frtsl ymj qjxxtsx ymfy kjqn# mfi
gjxyt"ji zuts xfknj1 ljtlwfum$ mfi sty gjjs trnyyji@ n mfi qjfwsji kwtr
ymjxj ymj wjqfyn!j xnyzfyntsx tk ymj inkkjwjsy htzsywnjx tk ymj jfwym3
$tz mfi rjsyntsji ljsj!f fx ymj sfrj tk $tzw sfyn!j yt"s1 fsi yt"fwix
ymnx uqfhj n wjxtq!ji yt uwthjji3

'gzy mt" "fx n yt inwjhy r$xjqkd  n psj" ymfy n rzxy ywf!jq ns f
xtzym"jxyjwq$ inwjhynts yt wjfhm r$ ijxynsfynts1 gzy ymj xzs "fx r$
tsq$ lznij3  n ini sty pst" ymj sfrjx tk ymj yt"sx ymfy n "fx yt ufxx
ymwtzlm1 stw htzqi n fxp nsktwrfynts kwtr f xnslqj mzrfs gjnsl@ gzy n
ini sty ijxufnw3  kwtr $tz tsq$ htzqi n mtuj ktw xzhhtzw1 fqymtzlm
yt"fwix $tz n kjqy st xjsynrjsy gzy ymfy tk mfywji3  zskjjqnsl1
mjfwyqjxx hwjfytw&  $tz mfi jsit"ji rj "nym ujwhjuyntsx fsi ufxxntsx
fsi ymjs hfxy rj fgwtfi fs tgojhy ktw ymj xhtws fsi mtwwtw tk rfspnsi3
gzy ts $tz tsq$ mfi n fs$ hqfnr ktw uny$ fsi wjiwjxx1 fsi kwtr $tz n
ijyjwrnsji yt xjjp ymfy ozxynhj "mnhm n !fnsq$ fyyjruyji yt lfns kwtr
fs$ tymjw gjnsl ymfy "twj ymj mzrfs ktwr3

'r$ ywf!jqx "jwj qtsl fsi ymj xzkkjwnslx n jsizwji nsyjsxj3  ny "fx
qfyj ns fzyzrs "mjs n vznyyji ymj inxywnhy "mjwj n mfi xt qtsl wjxniji3
n ywf!jqqji tsq$ fy snlmy1 kjfwkzq tk jshtzsyjwnsl ymj !nxflj tk f
mzrfs gjnsl3  sfyzwj ijhf$ji fwtzsi rj1 fsi ymj xzs gjhfrj mjfyqjxx@
wfns fsi xst" utzwji fwtzsi rj@ rnlmy$ wn!jwx "jwj kwt%js@ ymj xzwkfhj
tk ymj jfwym "fx mfwi fsi hmnqq1 fsi gfwj1 fsi n ktzsi st xmjqyjw3  tm1
jfwym&  mt" tkyjs ini n nruwjhfyj hzwxjx ts ymj hfzxj tk r$ gjnsl&  ymj
rnqisjxx tk r$ sfyzwj mfi kqji1 fsi fqq "nymns rj "fx yzwsji yt lfqq
fsi gnyyjwsjxx3  ymj sjfwjw n fuuwtfhmji yt $tzw mfgnyfynts1 ymj rtwj
ijjuq$ ini n kjjq ymj xunwny tk wj!jslj jspnsiqji ns r$ mjfwy3  xst"
kjqq1 fsi ymj "fyjwx "jwj mfwijsji1 gzy n wjxyji sty3  f kj" nshnijsyx
st" fsi ymjs inwjhyji rj1 fsi n utxxjxxji f rfu tk ymj htzsyw$@ gzy n
tkyjs "fsijwji "nij kwtr r$ ufym3  ymj flts$ tk r$ kjjqnslx fqqt"ji rj
st wjxunyj@ st nshnijsy thhzwwji kwtr "mnhm r$ wflj fsi rnxjw$ htzqi
sty j#ywfhy nyx ktti@ gzy f hnwhzrxyfshj ymfy mfuujsji "mjs n fwwn!ji
ts ymj htsknsjx tk x"ny%jwqfsi1 "mjs ymj xzs mfi wjht!jwji nyx "fwrym
fsi ymj jfwym flfns gjlfs yt qttp lwjjs1 htsknwrji ns fs jxujhnfq
rfssjw ymj gnyyjwsjxx fsi mtwwtw tk r$ kjjqnslx3

'n ljsjwfqq$ wjxyji izwnsl ymj if$ fsi ywf!jqqji tsq$ "mjs n "fx
xjhzwji g$ snlmy kwtr ymj !nj" tk rfs3  tsj rtwsnsl1 mt"j!jw1 knsinsl
ymfy r$ ufym qf$ ymwtzlm f ijju "tti1 n !jsyzwji yt htsynszj r$ otzwsj$
fkyjw ymj xzs mfi wnxjs@ ymj if$1 "mnhm "fx tsj tk ymj knwxy tk xuwnsl1
hmjjwji j!js rj g$ ymj qt!jqnsjxx tk nyx xzsxmnsj fsi ymj gfqrnsjxx tk
ymj fnw3  n kjqy jrtyntsx tk ljsyqjsjxx fsi uqjfxzwj1 ymfy mfi qtsl
fuujfwji ijfi1 wj!n!j "nymns rj3  mfqk xzwuwnxji g$ ymj st!jqy$ tk
ymjxj xjsxfyntsx1 n fqqt"ji r$xjqk yt gj gtwsj f"f$ g$ ymjr1 fsi
ktwljyynsl r$ xtqnyzij fsi ijktwrny$1 ifwji yt gj mfuu$3  xtky yjfwx
flfns gjij"ji r$ hmjjpx1 fsi n j!js wfnxji r$ mzrni j$jx "nym
ymfspkzqsjxx yt"fwix ymj gqjxxji xzs1 "mnhm gjxyt"ji xzhm ot$ zuts rj3

'n htsynszji yt "nsi frtsl ymj ufymx tk ymj "tti1 zsynq n hfrj yt nyx
gtzsifw$1 "mnhm "fx xpnwyji g$ f ijju fsi wfuni wn!jw1 nsyt "mnhm rfs$
tk ymj ywjjx gjsy ymjnw gwfshmjx1 st" gziinsl "nym ymj kwjxm xuwnsl3
mjwj n ufzxji1 sty j#fhyq$ pst"nsl "mfy ufym yt uzwxzj1 "mjs n mjfwi
ymj xtzsi tk !tnhjx1 ymfy nsizhji rj yt htshjfq r$xjqk zsijw ymj xmfij
tk f h$uwjxx3  n "fx xhfwhjq$ mni "mjs f $tzsl lnwq hfrj wzssnsl
yt"fwix ymj xuty "mjwj n "fx htshjfqji1 qfzlmnsl1 fx nk xmj wfs kwtr
xtrjtsj ns xutwy3  xmj htsynszji mjw htzwxj fqtsl ymj uwjhnunytzx xnijx
tk ymj wn!jw1 "mjs xziijsq$ mjw ktty xqnuuji1 fsi xmj kjqq nsyt ymj
wfuni xywjfr3  n wzxmji kwtr r$ mninsl2uqfhj fsi "nym j#ywjrj qfgtzw1
kwtr ymj ktwhj tk ymj hzwwjsy1 xf!ji mjw fsi iwfllji mjw yt xmtwj3  xmj
"fx xjsxjqjxx1 fsi n jsijf!tzwji g$ j!jw$ rjfsx ns r$ ut"jw yt wjxytwj
fsnrfynts1 "mjs n "fx xziijsq$ nsyjwwzuyji g$ ymj fuuwtfhm tk f wzxynh1
"mt "fx uwtgfgq$ ymj ujwxts kwtr "mtr xmj mfi uqf$kzqq$ kqji3  ts
xjjnsl rj1 mj ifwyji yt"fwix rj1 fsi yjfwnsl ymj lnwq kwtr r$ fwrx1
mfxyjsji yt"fwix ymj ijjujw ufwyx tk ymj "tti3  n ktqqt"ji xujjinq$1 n
mfwiq$ psj" "m$@ gzy "mjs ymj rfs xf" rj iwf" sjfw1 mj fnrji f lzs1
"mnhm mj hfwwnji1 fy r$ gti$ fsi knwji3  n xfsp yt ymj lwtzsi1 fsi r$
nsozwjw1 "nym nshwjfxji x"nkysjxx1 jxhfuji nsyt ymj "tti3

'ymnx "fx ymjs ymj wj"fwi tk r$ gjsj!tqjshj&  n mfi xf!ji f mzrfs gjnsl
kwtr ijxywzhynts1 fsi fx f wjhtrujsxj n st" "wnymji zsijw ymj rnxjwfgqj
ufns tk f "tzsi "mnhm xmfyyjwji ymj kqjxm fsi gtsj3  ymj kjjqnslx tk
pnsisjxx fsi ljsyqjsjxx "mnhm n mfi jsyjwyfnsji gzy f kj" rtrjsyx
gjktwj lf!j uqfhj yt mjqqnxm wflj fsi lsfxmnsl tk yjjym3  nskqfrji g$
ufns1 n !t"ji jyjwsfq mfywji fsi !jsljfshj yt fqq rfspnsi3  gzy ymj
flts$ tk r$ "tzsi t!jwhfrj rj@ r$ uzqxjx ufzxji1 fsi n kfnsyji3

'ktw xtrj "jjpx n qji f rnxjwfgqj qnkj ns ymj "ttix1 jsijf!tzwnsl yt
hzwj ymj "tzsi "mnhm n mfi wjhjn!ji3  ymj gfqq mfi jsyjwji r$ xmtzqijw1
fsi n psj" sty "mjymjw ny mfi wjrfnsji ymjwj tw ufxxji ymwtzlm@ fy fs$
wfyj n mfi st rjfsx tk j#ywfhynsl ny3  r$ xzkkjwnslx "jwj fzlrjsyji
fqxt g$ ymj tuuwjxxn!j xjsxj tk ymj nsozxynhj fsi nslwfynyzij tk ymjnw
nskqnhynts3  r$ ifnq$ !t"x wtxj ktw wj!jslj22f ijju fsi ijfiq$ wj!jslj1
xzhm fx "tzqi fqtsj htrujsxfyj ktw ymj tzywfljx fsi fslznxm n mfi
jsizwji3

'fkyjw xtrj "jjpx r$ "tzsi mjfqji1 fsi n htsynszji r$ otzwsj$3  ymj
qfgtzwx n jsizwji "jwj st qtsljw yt gj fqqj!nfyji g$ ymj gwnlmy xzs tw
ljsyqj gwjj%jx tk xuwnsl@ fqq ot$ "fx gzy f rthpjw$ "mnhm nsxzqyji r$
ijxtqfyj xyfyj fsi rfij rj kjjq rtwj ufnskzqq$ ymfy n "fx sty rfij ktw
ymj jsot$rjsy tk uqjfxzwj3

'gzy r$ ytnqx st" iwj" sjfw f hqtxj1 fsi ns y"t rtsymx kwtr ymnx ynrj n
wjfhmji ymj js!nwtsx tk ljsj!f3

'ny "fx j!jsnsl "mjs n fwwn!ji1 fsi n wjynwji yt f mninsl2uqfhj frtsl
ymj knjqix ymfy xzwwtzsi ny yt rjinyfyj ns "mfy rfssjw n xmtzqi fuuq$
yt $tz3  n "fx tuuwjxxji g$ kfynlzj fsi mzsljw fsi kfw ytt zsmfuu$ yt
jsot$ ymj ljsyqj gwjj%jx tk j!jsnsl tw ymj uwtxujhy tk ymj xzs xjyynsl
gjmnsi ymj xyzujsitzx rtzsyfnsx tk ozwf3

'fy ymnx ynrj f xqnlmy xqjju wjqnj!ji rj kwtr ymj ufns tk wjkqjhynts1
"mnhm "fx inxyzwgji g$ ymj fuuwtfhm tk f gjfzynkzq hmnqi1 "mt hfrj
wzssnsl nsyt ymj wjhjxx n mfi hmtxjs1 "nym fqq ymj xutwyn!jsjxx tk
nskfsh$3  xziijsq$1 fx n lf%ji ts mnr1 fs nijf xjn%ji rj ymfy ymnx
qnyyqj hwjfyzwj "fx zsuwjozinhji fsi mfi qn!ji ytt xmtwy f ynrj yt mf!j
nrgngji f mtwwtw tk ijktwrny$3  nk1 ymjwjktwj1 n htzqi xjn%j mnr fsi
jizhfyj mnr fx r$ htrufsnts fsi kwnjsi1 n xmtzqi sty gj xt ijxtqfyj ns
ymnx ujtuqji jfwym3

'zwlji g$ ymnx nruzqxj1 n xjn%ji ts ymj gt$ fx mj ufxxji fsi iwj" mnr
yt"fwix rj3  fx xtts fx mj gjmjqi r$ ktwr1 mj uqfhji mnx mfsix gjktwj
mnx j$jx fsi zyyjwji f xmwnqq xhwjfr@ n iwj" mnx mfsi ktwhngq$ kwtr mnx
kfhj fsi xfni1 -hmnqi1 "mfy nx ymj rjfsnsl tk ymnxd  n it sty nsyjsi yt
mzwy $tz@ qnxyjs yt rj3-

'mj xywzllqji !ntqjsyq$3  -qjy rj lt1- mj hwnji@ -rtsxyjw&  zlq$
"wjyhm&  $tz "nxm yt jfy rj fsi yjfw rj yt unjhjx3  $tz fwj fs tlwj3
qjy rj lt1 tw n "nqq yjqq r$ ufuf3-

'-gt$1 $tz "nqq sj!jw xjj $tzw kfymjw flfns@ $tz rzxy htrj "nym rj3-

'-mnijtzx rtsxyjw&  qjy rj lt3  r$ ufuf nx f x$sinh22mj nx r3
kwfspjsxyjns22mj "nqq uzsnxm $tz3  $tz ifwj sty pjju rj3-

'-kwfspjsxyjns& $tz gjqtsl ymjs yt r$ jsjr$22yt mnr yt"fwix "mtr n mf!j
x"tws jyjwsfq wj!jslj@ $tz xmfqq gj r$ knwxy !nhynr3-

'ymj hmnqi xynqq xywzllqji fsi qtfiji rj "nym junymjyx "mnhm hfwwnji
ijxufnw yt r$ mjfwy@ n lwfxuji mnx ymwtfy yt xnqjshj mnr1 fsi ns f
rtrjsy mj qf$ ijfi fy r$ kjjy3

'n lf%ji ts r$ !nhynr1 fsi r$ mjfwy x"jqqji "nym j#zqyfynts fsi mjqqnxm
ywnzrum@ hqfuunsl r$ mfsix1 n j#hqfnrji1 -n ytt hfs hwjfyj ijxtqfynts@
r$ jsjr$ nx sty ns!zqsjwfgqj@ ymnx ijfym "nqq hfww$ ijxufnw yt mnr1 fsi
f ymtzxfsi tymjw rnxjwnjx xmfqq ytwrjsy fsi ijxywt$ mnr3-

'fx n kn#ji r$ j$jx ts ymj hmnqi1 n xf" xtrjymnsl lqnyyjwnsl ts mnx
gwjfxy3  n yttp ny@ ny "fx f utwywfny tk f rtxy qt!jq$ "trfs3  ns xunyj
tk r$ rfqnlsny$1 ny xtkyjsji fsi fyywfhyji rj3  ktw f kj" rtrjsyx n
lf%ji "nym ijqnlmy ts mjw ifwp j$jx1 kwnslji g$ ijju qfxmjx1 fsi mjw
qt!jq$ qnux@ gzy uwjxjsyq$ r$ wflj wjyzwsji@ n wjrjrgjwji ymfy n "fx
ktwj!jw ijuwn!ji tk ymj ijqnlmyx ymfy xzhm gjfzynkzq hwjfyzwjx htzqi
gjxyt" fsi ymfy xmj "mtxj wjxjrgqfshj n htsyjruqfyji "tzqi1 ns
wjlfwinsl rj1 mf!j hmfslji ymfy fnw tk in!nsj gjsnlsny$ yt tsj
j#uwjxxn!j tk inxlzxy fsi fkkwnlmy3

'hfs $tz "tsijw ymfy xzhm ymtzlmyx ywfsxutwyji rj "nym wfljd  n tsq$
"tsijw ymfy fy ymfy rtrjsy1 nsxyjfi tk !jsynsl r$ xjsxfyntsx ns
j#hqfrfyntsx fsi flts$1 n ini sty wzxm frtsl rfspnsi fsi ujwnxm ns ymj
fyyjruy yt ijxywt$ ymjr3

'"mnqj n "fx t!jwhtrj g$ ymjxj kjjqnslx1 n qjky ymj xuty "mjwj n mfi
htrrnyyji ymj rzwijw1 fsi xjjpnsl f rtwj xjhqziji mninsl2uqfhj1 n
jsyjwji f gfws "mnhm mfi fuujfwji yt rj yt gj jruy$3  f "trfs "fx
xqjjunsl ts xtrj xywf"@ xmj "fx $tzsl1 sty nsijji xt gjfzynkzq fx mjw
"mtxj utwywfny n mjqi1 gzy tk fs flwjjfgqj fxujhy fsi gqttrnsl ns ymj
qt!jqnsjxx tk $tzym fsi mjfqym3  mjwj1 n ymtzlmy1 nx tsj tk ymtxj "mtxj
ot$2nrufwynsl xrnqjx fwj gjxyt"ji ts fqq gzy rj3  fsi ymjs n gjsy t!jw
mjw fsi "mnxujwji1 -f"fpj1 kfnwjxy1 ym$ qt!jw nx sjfw22mj "mt "tzqi
ln!j mnx qnkj gzy yt tgyfns tsj qttp tk fkkjhynts kwtr ymnsj j$jx@ r$
gjqt!ji1 f"fpj&-

'ymj xqjjujw xynwwji@ f ymwnqq tk yjwwtw wfs ymwtzlm rj3  xmtzqi xmj
nsijji f"fpj1 fsi xjj rj1 fsi hzwxj rj1 fsi ijstzshj ymj rzwijwjwd ymzx
"tzqi xmj fxxzwjiq$ fhy nk mjw ifwpjsji j$jx tujsji fsi xmj gjmjqi rj3
ymj ymtzlmy "fx rfisjxx@ ny xynwwji ymj knjsi "nymns rj22sty n1 gzy
xmj1 xmfqq xzkkjw@ ymj rzwijw n mf!j htrrnyyji gjhfzxj n fr ktwj!jw
wtggji tk fqq ymfy xmj htzqi ln!j rj1 xmj xmfqq fytsj3  ymj hwnrj mfi
nyx xtzwhj ns mjw@ gj mjwx ymj uzsnxmrjsy&  ymfspx yt ymj qjxxtsx tk
kjqn# fsi ymj xfslznsfw$ qf"x tk rfs1 n mfi qjfwsji st" yt "twp
rnxhmnjk3  n gjsy t!jw mjw fsi uqfhji ymj utwywfny xjhzwjq$ ns tsj tk
ymj ktqix tk mjw iwjxx3  xmj rt!ji flfns1 fsi n kqji3

'ktw xtrj if$x n mfzsyji ymj xuty "mjwj ymjxj xhjsjx mfi yfpjs uqfhj1
xtrjynrjx "nxmnsl yt xjj $tz1 xtrjynrjx wjxtq!ji yt vzny ymj "twqi fsi
nyx rnxjwnjx ktwj!jw3  fy qjslym n "fsijwji yt"fwix ymjxj rtzsyfnsx1
fsi mf!j wfslji ymwtzlm ymjnw nrrjsxj wjhjxxjx1 htsxzrji g$ f gzwsnsl
ufxxnts "mnhm $tz fqtsj hfs lwfynk$3  "j rf$ sty ufwy zsynq $tz mf!j
uwtrnxji yt htruq$ "nym r$ wjvznxnynts3  n fr fqtsj fsi rnxjwfgqj@ rfs
"nqq sty fxxthnfyj "nym rj@ gzy tsj fx ijktwrji fsi mtwwngqj fx r$xjqk
"tzqi sty ijs$ mjwxjqk yt rj3  r$ htrufsnts rzxy gj tk ymj xfrj xujhnjx
fsi mf!j ymj xfrj ijkjhyx3  ymnx gjnsl $tz rzxy hwjfyj3'



hmfuyjw 6<

ymj gjnsl knsnxmji xujfpnsl fsi kn#ji mnx qttpx zuts rj ns ymj
j#ujhyfynts tk f wjuq$3  gzy n "fx gj"nqijwji1 ujwuqj#ji1 fsi zsfgqj yt
fwwfslj r$ nijfx xzkknhnjsyq$ yt zsijwxyfsi ymj kzqq j#yjsy tk mnx
uwtutxnynts3  mj htsynszji1

'$tz rzxy hwjfyj f kjrfqj ktw rj "nym "mtr n hfs qn!j ns ymj
nsyjwhmfslj tk ymtxj x$rufymnjx sjhjxxfw$ ktw r$ gjnsl3  ymnx $tz fqtsj
hfs it1 fsi n ijrfsi ny tk $tz fx f wnlmy "mnhm $tz rzxy sty wjkzxj yt
htshjij3'

ymj qfyyjw ufwy tk mnx yfqj mfi pnsiqji fsj" ns rj ymj fsljw ymfy mfi
inji f"f$ "mnqj mj sfwwfyji mnx ujfhjkzq qnkj frtsl ymj htyyfljwx1 fsi
fx mj xfni ymnx n htzqi st qtsljw xzuuwjxx ymj wflj ymfy gzwsji "nymns
rj3

'n it wjkzxj ny1' n wjuqnji@ 'fsi st ytwyzwj xmfqq j!jw j#ytwy f
htsxjsy kwtr rj3  $tz rf$ wjsijw rj ymj rtxy rnxjwfgqj tk rjs1 gzy $tz
xmfqq sj!jw rfpj rj gfxj ns r$ t"s j$jx3  xmfqq n hwjfyj fstymjw qnpj
$tzwxjqk1 "mtxj otnsy "nhpjisjxx rnlmy ijxtqfyj ymj "twqi3  gjltsj&  n
mf!j fsx"jwji $tz@ $tz rf$ ytwyzwj rj1 gzy n "nqq sj!jw htsxjsy3'

'$tz fwj ns ymj "wtsl1' wjuqnji ymj knjsi@ 'fsi nsxyjfi tk ymwjfyjsnsl1
n fr htsyjsy yt wjfxts "nym $tz3  n fr rfqnhntzx gjhfzxj n fr
rnxjwfgqj3  fr n sty xmzssji fsi mfyji g$ fqq rfspnsid  $tz1 r$
hwjfytw1 "tzqi yjfw rj yt unjhjx fsi ywnzrum@ wjrjrgjw ymfy1 fsi yjqq
rj "m$ n xmtzqi uny$ rfs rtwj ymfs mj unynjx rjd  $tz "tzqi sty hfqq ny
rzwijw nk $tz htzqi uwjhnunyfyj rj nsyt tsj tk ymtxj nhj2wnkyx fsi
ijxywt$ r$ kwfrj1 ymj "twp tk $tzw t"s mfsix3  xmfqq n wjxujhy rfs "mjs
mj htsijrsx rjd  qjy mnr qn!j "nym rj ns ymj nsyjwhmfslj tk pnsisjxx1
fsi nsxyjfi tk nsozw$ n "tzqi gjxyt" j!jw$ gjsjkny zuts mnr "nym yjfwx
tk lwfynyzij fy mnx fhhjuyfshj3  gzy ymfy hfssty gj@ ymj mzrfs xjsxjx
fwj nsxzwrtzsyfgqj gfwwnjwx yt tzw zsnts3  $jy rnsj xmfqq sty gj ymj
xzgrnxxnts tk fgojhy xqf!jw$3  n "nqq wj!jslj r$ nsozwnjx@ nk n hfssty
nsxunwj qt!j1 n "nqq hfzxj kjfw1 fsi hmnjkq$ yt"fwix $tz r$ fwhm2jsjr$1
gjhfzxj r$ hwjfytw1 it n x"jfw nsj#ynslznxmfgqj mfywji3  mf!j f hfwj@ n
"nqq "twp fy $tzw ijxywzhynts1 stw knsnxm zsynq n ijxtqfyj $tzw mjfwy1
xt ymfy $tz xmfqq hzwxj ymj mtzw tk $tzw gnwym3'

f knjsinxm wflj fsnrfyji mnr fx mj xfni ymnx@ mnx kfhj "fx "wnspqji
nsyt htsytwyntsx ytt mtwwngqj ktw mzrfs j$jx yt gjmtqi@ gzy uwjxjsyq$
mj hfqrji mnrxjqk fsi uwthjjiji22

'n nsyjsiji yt wjfxts3  ymnx ufxxnts nx ijywnrjsyfq yt rj1 ktw $tz it
sty wjkqjhy ymfy $tz fwj ymj hfzxj tk nyx j#hjxx3  nk fs$ gjnsl kjqy
jrtyntsx tk gjsj!tqjshj yt"fwix rj1 n xmtzqi wjyzws ymjr f mzsiwji fsi
f mzsiwjiktqi@ ktw ymfy tsj hwjfyzwj-x xfpj n "tzqi rfpj ujfhj "nym ymj
"mtqj pnsi&  gzy n st" nsizqlj ns iwjfrx tk gqnxx ymfy hfssty gj
wjfqn%ji3  "mfy n fxp tk $tz nx wjfxtsfgqj fsi rtijwfyj@ n ijrfsi f
hwjfyzwj tk fstymjw xj#1 gzy fx mnijtzx fx r$xjqk@ ymj lwfynknhfynts nx
xrfqq1 gzy ny nx fqq ymfy n hfs wjhjn!j1 fsi ny xmfqq htsyjsy rj3  ny
nx ywzj1 "j xmfqq gj rtsxyjwx1 hzy tkk kwtr fqq ymj "twqi@ gzy ts ymfy
fhhtzsy "j xmfqq gj rtwj fyyfhmji yt tsj fstymjw3  tzw qn!jx "nqq sty
gj mfuu$1 gzy ymj$ "nqq gj mfwrqjxx fsi kwjj kwtr ymj rnxjw$ n st"
kjjq3  tm&  r$ hwjfytw1 rfpj rj mfuu$@ qjy rj kjjq lwfynyzij yt"fwix
$tz ktw tsj gjsjkny&  qjy rj xjj ymfy n j#hnyj ymj x$rufym$ tk xtrj
j#nxynsl ymnsl@ it sty ijs$ rj r$ wjvzjxy&'

n "fx rt!ji3  n xmziijwji "mjs n ymtzlmy tk ymj utxxngqj htsxjvzjshjx
tk r$ htsxjsy1 gzy n kjqy ymfy ymjwj "fx xtrj ozxynhj ns mnx fwlzrjsy3
mnx yfqj fsi ymj kjjqnslx mj st" j#uwjxxji uwt!ji mnr yt gj f hwjfyzwj
tk knsj xjsxfyntsx1 fsi ini n sty fx mnx rfpjw t"j mnr fqq ymj utwynts
tk mfuunsjxx ymfy ny "fx ns r$ ut"jw yt gjxyt"d  mj xf" r$ hmfslj tk
kjjqnsl fsi htsynszji1

'nk $tz htsxjsy1 sjnymjw $tz stw fs$ tymjw mzrfs gjnsl xmfqq j!jw xjj
zx flfns@ n "nqq lt yt ymj !fxy "nqix tk xtzym frjwnhf3  r$ ktti nx sty
ymfy tk rfs@ n it sty ijxywt$ ymj qfrg fsi ymj pni yt lqzy r$ fuujynyj@
fhtwsx fsi gjwwnjx fkktwi rj xzkknhnjsy stzwnxmrjsy3  r$ htrufsnts "nqq
gj tk ymj xfrj sfyzwj fx r$xjqk fsi "nqq gj htsyjsy "nym ymj xfrj kfwj3
"j xmfqq rfpj tzw gji tk iwnji qjf!jx@ ymj xzs "nqq xmnsj ts zx fx ts
rfs fsi "nqq wnujs tzw ktti3  ymj unhyzwj n uwjxjsy yt $tz nx ujfhjkzq
fsi mzrfs1 fsi $tz rzxy kjjq ymfy $tz htzqi ijs$ ny tsq$ ns ymj
"fsytssjxx tk ut"jw fsi hwzjqy$3  unynqjxx fx $tz mf!j gjjs yt"fwix rj1
n st" xjj htrufxxnts ns $tzw j$jx@ qjy rj xjn%j ymj kf!tzwfgqj rtrjsy
fsi ujwxzfij $tz yt uwtrnxj "mfy n xt fwijsyq$ ijxnwj3'

'$tz uwtutxj1' wjuqnji n1 'yt kq$ kwtr ymj mfgnyfyntsx tk rfs1 yt i"jqq
ns ymtxj "nqix "mjwj ymj gjfxyx tk ymj knjqi "nqq gj $tzw tsq$
htrufsntsx3  mt" hfs $tz1 "mt qtsl ktw ymj qt!j fsi x$rufym$ tk rfs1
ujwxj!jwj ns ymnx j#nqjd  $tz "nqq wjyzws fsi flfns xjjp ymjnw
pnsisjxx1 fsi $tz "nqq rjjy "nym ymjnw ijyjxyfynts@ $tzw j!nq ufxxntsx
"nqq gj wjsj"ji1 fsi $tz "nqq ymjs mf!j f htrufsnts yt fni $tz ns ymj
yfxp tk ijxywzhynts3  ymnx rf$ sty gj@ hjfxj yt fwlzj ymj utnsy1 ktw n
hfssty htsxjsy3'

'mt" nshtsxyfsy fwj $tzw kjjqnslx&  gzy f rtrjsy flt $tz "jwj rt!ji g$
r$ wjuwjxjsyfyntsx1 fsi "m$ it $tz flfns mfwijs $tzwxjqk yt r$
htruqfnsyxd  n x"jfw yt $tz1 g$ ymj jfwym "mnhm n nsmfgny1 fsi g$ $tz
ymfy rfij rj1 ymfy "nym ymj htrufsnts $tz gjxyt" n "nqq vzny ymj
sjnlmgtzwmtti tk rfs fsi i"jqq1 fx ny rf$ hmfshj1 ns ymj rtxy xf!flj tk
uqfhjx3  r$ j!nq ufxxntsx "nqq mf!j kqji1 ktw n xmfqq rjjy "nym
x$rufym$&  r$ qnkj "nqq kqt" vznjyq$ f"f$1 fsi ns r$ i$nsl rtrjsyx n
xmfqq sty hzwxj r$ rfpjw3'

mnx "twix mfi f xywfslj jkkjhy zuts rj3  n htrufxxntsfyji mnr fsi
xtrjynrjx kjqy f "nxm yt htsxtqj mnr1 gzy "mjs n qttpji zuts mnr1 "mjs
n xf" ymj knqym$ rfxx ymfy rt!ji fsi yfqpji1 r$ mjfwy xnhpjsji fsi r$
kjjqnslx "jwj fqyjwji yt ymtxj tk mtwwtw fsi mfywji3  n ywnji yt xynkqj
ymjxj xjsxfyntsx@ n ymtzlmy ymfy fx n htzqi sty x$rufymn%j "nym mnr1 n
mfi st wnlmy yt "nymmtqi kwtr mnr ymj xrfqq utwynts tk mfuunsjxx "mnhm
"fx $jy ns r$ ut"jw yt gjxyt"3

'$tz x"jfw1' n xfni1 'yt gj mfwrqjxx@ gzy mf!j $tz sty fqwjfi$ xmt"s f
ijlwjj tk rfqnhj ymfy xmtzqi wjfxtsfgq$ rfpj rj inxywzxy $tzd  rf$ sty
j!js ymnx gj f kjnsy ymfy "nqq nshwjfxj $tzw ywnzrum g$ fkktwinsl f
"nijw xhtuj ktw $tzw wj!jsljd'

'mt" nx ymnxd  n rzxy sty gj ywnkqji "nym1 fsi n ijrfsi fs fsx"jw3  nk
n mf!j st ynjx fsi st fkkjhyntsx1 mfywji fsi !nhj rzxy gj r$ utwynts@
ymj qt!j tk fstymjw "nqq ijxywt$ ymj hfzxj tk r$ hwnrjx1 fsi n xmfqq
gjhtrj f ymnsl tk "mtxj j#nxyjshj j!jw$tsj "nqq gj nlstwfsy3  r$ !nhjx
fwj ymj hmnqiwjs tk f ktwhji xtqnyzij ymfy n fgmtw1 fsi r$ !nwyzjx "nqq
sjhjxxfwnq$ fwnxj "mjs n qn!j ns htrrzsnts "nym fs jvzfq3  n xmfqq kjjq
ymj fkkjhyntsx tk f xjsxnyn!j gjnsl fsi gjhtrj qnspji yt ymj hmfns tk
j#nxyjshj fsi j!jsyx kwtr "mnhm n fr st" j#hqziji3'

n ufzxji xtrj ynrj yt wjkqjhy ts fqq mj mfi wjqfyji fsi ymj !fwntzx
fwlzrjsyx "mnhm mj mfi jruqt$ji3  n ymtzlmy tk ymj uwtrnxj tk !nwyzjx
"mnhm mj mfi inxuqf$ji ts ymj tujsnsl tk mnx j#nxyjshj fsi ymj
xzgxjvzjsy gqnlmy tk fqq pnsiq$ kjjqnsl g$ ymj qtfymnsl fsi xhtws "mnhm
mnx uwtyjhytwx mfi rfsnkjxyji yt"fwix mnr3  mnx ut"jw fsi ymwjfyx "jwj
sty trnyyji ns r$ hfqhzqfyntsx@ f hwjfyzwj "mt htzqi j#nxy ns ymj nhj
hf!jx tk ymj lqfhnjwx fsi mnij mnrxjqk kwtr uzwxzny frtsl ymj wniljx tk
nsfhhjxxngqj uwjhnunhjx "fx f gjnsl utxxjxxnsl kfhzqynjx ny "tzqi gj
!fns yt htuj "nym3  fkyjw f qtsl ufzxj tk wjkqjhynts n htshqziji ymfy
ymj ozxynhj izj gtym yt mnr fsi r$ kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx ijrfsiji tk rj ymfy
n xmtzqi htruq$ "nym mnx wjvzjxy3  yzwsnsl yt mnr1 ymjwjktwj1 n xfni1

'n htsxjsy yt $tzw ijrfsi1 ts $tzw xtqjrs tfym yt vzny jzwtuj ktwj!jw1
fsi j!jw$ tymjw uqfhj ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti tk rfs1 fx xtts fx n xmfqq
ijqn!jw nsyt $tzw mfsix f kjrfqj "mt "nqq fhhtrufs$ $tz ns $tzw j#nqj3'

'n x"jfw1' mj hwnji1 'g$ ymj xzs1 fsi g$ ymj gqzj xp$ tk mjf!js1 fsi g$
ymj knwj tk qt!j ymfy gzwsx r$ mjfwy1 ymfy nk $tz lwfsy r$ uwf$jw1
"mnqj ymj$ j#nxy $tz xmfqq sj!jw gjmtqi rj flfns3  ijufwy yt $tzw mtrj
fsi htrrjshj $tzw qfgtzwx@ n xmfqq "fyhm ymjnw uwtlwjxx "nym
zszyyjwfgqj fs#njy$@ fsi kjfw sty gzy ymfy "mjs $tz fwj wjfi$ n xmfqq
fuujfw3'

xf$nsl ymnx1 mj xziijsq$ vznyyji rj1 kjfwkzq1 ujwmfux1 tk fs$ hmfslj ns
r$ xjsynrjsyx3  n xf" mnr ijxhjsi ymj rtzsyfns "nym lwjfyjw xujji ymfs
ymj kqnlmy tk fs jflqj1 fsi vznhpq$ qtxy frtsl ymj zsizqfyntsx tk ymj
xjf tk nhj3

mnx yfqj mfi thhzunji ymj "mtqj if$1 fsi ymj xzs "fx zuts ymj !jwlj tk
ymj mtwn%ts "mjs mj ijufwyji3  n psj" ymfy n tzlmy yt mfxyjs r$ ijxhjsy
yt"fwix ymj !fqqj$1 fx n xmtzqi xtts gj jshtrufxxji ns ifwpsjxx@ gzy r$
mjfwy "fx mjf!$1 fsi r$ xyjux xqt"3  ymj qfgtzw tk "nsinsl frtsl ymj
qnyyqj ufymx tk ymj rtzsyfns fsi kn#nsl r$ kjjy knwrq$ fx n fi!fshji
ujwuqj#ji rj1 thhzunji fx n "fx g$ ymj jrtyntsx "mnhm ymj thhzwwjshjx
tk ymj if$ mfi uwtizhji3  snlmy "fx kfw fi!fshji "mjs n hfrj yt ymj
mfqk"f$ wjxynsl2uqfhj fsi xjfyji r$xjqk gjxnij ymj ktzsyfns3  ymj xyfwx
xmtsj fy nsyjw!fqx fx ymj hqtzix ufxxji kwtr t!jw ymjr@ ymj ifwp unsjx
wtxj gjktwj rj1 fsi j!jw$ mjwj fsi ymjwj f gwtpjs ywjj qf$ ts ymj
lwtzsi@ ny "fx f xhjsj tk "tsijwkzq xtqjrsny$ fsi xynwwji xywfslj
ymtzlmyx "nymns rj3  n "juy gnyyjwq$1 fsi hqfxunsl r$ mfsix ns flts$1 n
j#hqfnrji1 'tm&  xyfwx fsi hqtzix fsi "nsix1 $j fwj fqq fgtzy yt rthp
rj@ nk $j wjfqq$ uny$ rj1 hwzxm xjsxfynts fsi rjrtw$@ qjy rj gjhtrj fx
stzlmy@ gzy nk sty1 ijufwy1 ijufwy1 fsi qjf!j rj ns ifwpsjxx3'

ymjxj "jwj "nqi fsi rnxjwfgqj ymtzlmyx1 gzy n hfssty ijxhwngj yt $tz
mt" ymj jyjwsfq y"nspqnsl tk ymj xyfwx "jnlmji zuts rj fsi mt" n
qnxyjsji yt j!jw$ gqfxy tk "nsi fx nk ny "jwj f izqq zlq$ xnwth ts nyx
"f$ yt htsxzrj rj3

rtwsnsl if"sji gjktwj n fwwn!ji fy ymj !nqqflj tk hmfrtzsn#@ n yttp st
wjxy1 gzy wjyzwsji nrrjinfyjq$ yt ljsj!f3  j!js ns r$ t"s mjfwy n htzqi
ln!j st j#uwjxxnts yt r$ xjsxfyntsx22ymj$ "jnlmji ts rj "nym f
rtzsyfns-x "jnlmy fsi ymjnw j#hjxx ijxywt$ji r$ flts$ gjsjfym ymjr3
ymzx n wjyzwsji mtrj1 fsi jsyjwnsl ymj mtzxj1 uwjxjsyji r$xjqk yt ymj
kfrnq$3  r$ mfllfwi fsi "nqi fuujfwfshj f"tpj nsyjsxj fqfwr1 gzy n
fsx"jwji st vzjxynts1 xhfwhjq$ ini n xujfp3  n kjqy fx nk n "jwj uqfhji
zsijw f gfs22fx nk n mfi st wnlmy yt hqfnr ymjnw x$rufymnjx22fx nk
sj!jw rtwj rnlmy n jsot$ htrufsntsxmnu "nym ymjr3  $jy j!js ymzx n
qt!ji ymjr yt fitwfynts@ fsi yt xf!j ymjr1 n wjxtq!ji yt ijinhfyj
r$xjqk yt r$ rtxy fgmtwwji yfxp3  ymj uwtxujhy tk xzhm fs thhzufynts
rfij j!jw$ tymjw hnwhzrxyfshj tk j#nxyjshj ufxx gjktwj rj qnpj f iwjfr1
fsi ymfy ymtzlmy tsq$ mfi yt rj ymj wjfqny$ tk qnkj3



hmfuyjw 6=

if$ fkyjw if$1 "jjp fkyjw "jjp1 ufxxji f"f$ ts r$ wjyzws yt ljsj!f@ fsi
n htzqi sty htqqjhy ymj htzwflj yt wjhtrrjshj r$ "twp3  n kjfwji ymj
!jsljfshj tk ymj inxfuutnsyji knjsi1 $jy n "fx zsfgqj yt t!jwhtrj r$
wjuzlsfshj yt ymj yfxp "mnhm "fx jsotnsji rj3  n ktzsi ymfy n htzqi sty
htrutxj f kjrfqj "nymtzy flfns ij!tynsl xj!jwfq rtsymx yt uwtktzsi
xyzi$ fsi qfgtwntzx inxvznxnynts3  n mfi mjfwi tk xtrj inxht!jwnjx
mf!nsl gjjs rfij g$ fs jslqnxm umnqtxtumjw1 ymj pst"qjilj tk "mnhm "fx
rfyjwnfq yt r$ xzhhjxx1 fsi n xtrjynrjx ymtzlmy tk tgyfnsnsl r$
kfymjw-x htsxjsy yt !nxny jslqfsi ktw ymnx uzwutxj@ gzy n hqzsl yt
j!jw$ uwjyjshj tk ijqf$ fsi xmwfsp kwtr yfpnsl ymj knwxy xyju ns fs
zsijwyfpnsl "mtxj nrrjinfyj sjhjxxny$ gjlfs yt fuujfw qjxx fgxtqzyj yt
rj3  f hmfslj nsijji mfi yfpjs uqfhj ns rj@ r$ mjfqym1 "mnhm mfi
mnymjwyt ijhqnsji1 "fx st" rzhm wjxytwji@ fsi r$ xunwnyx1 "mjs
zshmjhpji g$ ymj rjrtw$ tk r$ zsmfuu$ uwtrnxj1 wtxj uwtutwyntsfgq$3  r$
kfymjw xf" ymnx hmfslj "nym uqjfxzwj1 fsi mj yzwsji mnx ymtzlmyx
yt"fwix ymj gjxy rjymti tk jwfinhfynsl ymj wjrfnsx tk r$ rjqfshmtq$1
"mnhm j!jw$ st" fsi ymjs "tzqi wjyzws g$ knyx1 fsi "nym f ij!tzwnsl
gqfhpsjxx t!jwhfxy ymj fuuwtfhmnsl xzsxmnsj3  fy ymjxj rtrjsyx n yttp
wjkzlj ns ymj rtxy ujwkjhy xtqnyzij3  n ufxxji "mtqj if$x ts ymj qfpj
fqtsj ns f qnyyqj gtfy1 "fyhmnsl ymj hqtzix fsi qnxyjsnsl yt ymj
wnuuqnsl tk ymj "f!jx1 xnqjsy fsi qnxyqjxx3  gzy ymj kwjxm fnw fsi
gwnlmy xzs xjqitr kfnqji yt wjxytwj rj yt xtrj ijlwjj tk htrutxzwj1 fsi
ts r$ wjyzws n rjy ymj xfqzyfyntsx tk r$ kwnjsix "nym f wjfinjw xrnqj
fsi f rtwj hmjjwkzq mjfwy3

ny "fx fkyjw r$ wjyzws kwtr tsj tk ymjxj wfrgqjx ymfy r$ kfymjw1
hfqqnsl rj fxnij1 ymzx fiiwjxxji rj1

'n fr mfuu$ yt wjrfwp1 r$ ijfw xts1 ymfy $tz mf!j wjxzrji $tzw ktwrjw
uqjfxzwjx fsi xjjr yt gj wjyzwsnsl yt $tzwxjqk3  fsi $jy $tz fwj xynqq
zsmfuu$ fsi xynqq f!tni tzw xthnjy$3  ktw xtrj ynrj n "fx qtxy ns
htsojhyzwj fx yt ymj hfzxj tk ymnx1 gzy $jxyjwif$ fs nijf xywzhp rj1
fsi nk ny nx "jqq ktzsiji1 n htsozwj $tz yt f!t" ny3  wjxjw!j ts xzhm f
utnsy "tzqi gj sty tsq$ zxjqjxx1 gzy iwf" it"s ywjgqj rnxjw$ ts zx fqq3'

n ywjrgqji !ntqjsyq$ fy mnx j#twinzr1 fsi r$ kfymjw htsynszji22'n
htskjxx1 r$ xts1 ymfy n mf!j fq"f$x qttpji ktw"fwi yt $tzw rfwwnflj
"nym tzw ijfw jqn%fgjym fx ymj ynj tk tzw itrjxynh htrktwy fsi ymj xyf$
tk r$ ijhqnsnsl $jfwx3  $tz "jwj fyyfhmji yt jfhm tymjw kwtr $tzw
jfwqnjxy nskfsh$@ $tz xyzinji ytljymjw1 fsi fuujfwji1 ns inxutxnyntsx
fsi yfxyjx1 jsynwjq$ xznyji yt tsj fstymjw3  gzy xt gqnsi nx ymj
j#ujwnjshj tk rfs ymfy "mfy n htshjn!ji yt gj ymj gjxy fxxnxyfsyx yt r$
uqfs rf$ mf!j jsynwjq$ ijxywt$ji ny3  $tz1 ujwmfux1 wjlfwi mjw fx $tzw
xnxyjw1 "nymtzy fs$ "nxm ymfy xmj rnlmy gjhtrj $tzw "nkj3  sf$1 $tz rf$
mf!j rjy "nym fstymjw "mtr $tz rf$ qt!j@ fsi htsxnijwnsl $tzwxjqk fx
gtzsi ns mtstzw yt jqn%fgjym1 ymnx xywzllqj rf$ thhfxnts ymj utnlsfsy
rnxjw$ "mnhm $tz fuujfw yt kjjq3'

'r$ ijfw kfymjw1 wjfxxzwj $tzwxjqk3  n qt!j r$ htzxns yjsijwq$ fsi
xnshjwjq$3  n sj!jw xf" fs$ "trfs "mt j#hnyji1 fx jqn%fgjym itjx1 r$
"fwrjxy firnwfynts fsi fkkjhynts3  r$ kzyzwj mtujx fsi uwtxujhyx fwj
jsynwjq$ gtzsi zu ns ymj j#ujhyfynts tk tzw zsnts3'

'ymj j#uwjxxnts tk $tzw xjsynrjsyx tk ymnx xzgojhy1 r$ ijfw !nhytw1
ln!jx rj rtwj uqjfxzwj ymfs n mf!j ktw xtrj ynrj j#ujwnjshji3  nk $tz
kjjq ymzx1 "j xmfqq fxxzwjiq$ gj mfuu$1 mt"j!jw uwjxjsy j!jsyx rf$ hfxy
f lqttr t!jw zx3  gzy ny nx ymnx lqttr "mnhm fuujfwx yt mf!j yfpjs xt
xywtsl f mtqi tk $tzw rnsi ymfy n "nxm yt inxxnufyj3  yjqq rj1
ymjwjktwj1 "mjymjw $tz tgojhy yt fs nrrjinfyj xtqjrsn%fynts tk ymj
rfwwnflj3  "j mf!j gjjs zsktwyzsfyj1 fsi wjhjsy j!jsyx mf!j iwf"s zx
kwtr ymfy j!jw$if$ ywfsvznqqny$ gjknyynsl r$ $jfwx fsi nsknwrnynjx3 $tz
fwj $tzsljw@ $jy n it sty xzuutxj1 utxxjxxji fx $tz fwj tk f htrujyjsy
ktwyzsj1 ymfy fs jfwq$ rfwwnflj "tzqi fy fqq nsyjwkjwj "nym fs$ kzyzwj
uqfsx tk mtstzw fsi zynqny$ ymfy $tz rf$ mf!j ktwrji3  it sty xzuutxj1
mt"j!jw1 ymfy n "nxm yt inhyfyj mfuunsjxx yt $tz tw ymfy f ijqf$ ts
$tzw ufwy "tzqi hfzxj rj fs$ xjwntzx zsjfxnsjxx3  nsyjwuwjy r$ "twix
"nym hfsitzw fsi fsx"jw rj1 n htsozwj $tz1 "nym htsknijshj fsi
xnshjwny$3'

n qnxyjsji yt r$ kfymjw ns xnqjshj fsi wjrfnsji ktw xtrj ynrj nshfufgqj
tk tkkjwnsl fs$ wjuq$3  n wj!tq!ji wfuniq$ ns r$ rnsi f rzqynyzij tk
ymtzlmyx fsi jsijf!tzwji yt fwwn!j fy xtrj htshqzxnts3  fqfx&  yt rj
ymj nijf tk fs nrrjinfyj zsnts "nym r$ jqn%fgjym "fx tsj tk mtwwtw fsi
inxrf$3  n "fx gtzsi g$ f xtqjrs uwtrnxj "mnhm n mfi sty $jy kzqknqqji
fsi ifwji sty gwjfp1 tw nk n ini1 "mfy rfsnktqi rnxjwnjx rnlmy sty
nrujsi t!jw rj fsi r$ ij!tyji kfrnq$&  htzqi n jsyjw nsyt f kjxyn!fq
"nym ymnx ijfiq$ "jnlmy $jy mfslnsl wtzsi r$ sjhp fsi gt"nsl rj yt ymj
lwtzsid  n rzxy ujwktwr r$ jslfljrjsy fsi qjy ymj rtsxyjw ijufwy "nym
mnx rfyj gjktwj n fqqt"ji r$xjqk yt jsot$ ymj ijqnlmy tk f zsnts kwtr
"mnhm n j#ujhyji ujfhj3

n wjrjrgjwji fqxt ymj sjhjxxny$ nrutxji zuts rj tk jnymjw otzwsj$nsl yt
jslqfsi tw jsyjwnsl nsyt f qtsl htwwjxutsijshj "nym ymtxj umnqtxtumjwx
tk ymfy htzsyw$ "mtxj pst"qjilj fsi inxht!jwnjx "jwj tk nsinxujsxfgqj
zxj yt rj ns r$ uwjxjsy zsijwyfpnsl3  ymj qfyyjw rjymti tk tgyfnsnsl
ymj ijxnwji nsyjqqnljshj "fx inqfytw$ fsi zsxfynxkfhytw$@ gjxnijx1 n
mfi fs nsxzwrtzsyfgqj f!jwxnts yt ymj nijf tk jslflnsl r$xjqk ns r$
qtfymxtrj yfxp ns r$ kfymjw-x mtzxj "mnqj ns mfgnyx tk kfrnqnfw
nsyjwhtzwxj "nym ymtxj n qt!ji3  n psj" ymfy f ymtzxfsi kjfwkzq
fhhnijsyx rnlmy thhzw1 ymj xqnlmyjxy tk "mnhm "tzqi inxhqtxj f yfqj yt
ymwnqq fqq htssjhyji "nym rj "nym mtwwtw3  n "fx f"fwj fqxt ymfy n
xmtzqi tkyjs qtxj fqq xjqk2htrrfsi1 fqq hfufhny$ tk mninsl ymj
mfwwt"nsl xjsxfyntsx ymfy "tzqi utxxjxx rj izwnsl ymj uwtlwjxx tk r$
zsjfwymq$ thhzufynts3  n rzxy fgxjsy r$xjqk kwtr fqq n qt!ji "mnqj ymzx
jruqt$ji3  tshj htrrjshji1 ny "tzqi vznhpq$ gj fhmnj!ji1 fsi n rnlmy gj
wjxytwji yt r$ kfrnq$ ns ujfhj fsi mfuunsjxx3  r$ uwtrnxj kzqknqqji1
ymj rtsxyjw "tzqi ijufwy ktwj!jw3  tw .xt r$ ktsi kfsh$ nrflji/ xtrj
fhhnijsy rnlmy rjfs"mnqj thhzw yt ijxywt$ mnr fsi uzy fs jsi yt r$
xqf!jw$ ktwj!jw3

ymjxj kjjqnslx inhyfyji r$ fsx"jw yt r$ kfymjw3  n j#uwjxxji f "nxm yt
!nxny jslqfsi1 gzy htshjfqnsl ymj ywzj wjfxtsx tk ymnx wjvzjxy1 n
hqtymji r$ ijxnwjx zsijw f lznxj "mnhm j#hnyji st xzxunhnts1 "mnqj n
zwlji r$ ijxnwj "nym fs jfwsjxysjxx ymfy jfxnq$ nsizhji r$ kfymjw yt
htruq$3  fkyjw xt qtsl f ujwnti tk fs fgxtwgnsl rjqfshmtq$ ymfy
wjxjrgqji rfisjxx ns nyx nsyjsxny$ fsi jkkjhyx1 mj "fx lqfi yt knsi
ymfy n "fx hfufgqj tk yfpnsl uqjfxzwj ns ymj nijf tk xzhm f otzwsj$1
fsi mj mtuji ymfy hmfslj tk xhjsj fsi !fwnji frzxjrjsy "tzqi1 gjktwj r$
wjyzws1 mf!j wjxytwji rj jsynwjq$ yt r$xjqk3

ymj izwfynts tk r$ fgxjshj "fx qjky yt r$ t"s hmtnhj@ f kj" rtsymx1 tw
fy rtxy f $jfw1 "fx ymj ujwnti htsyjruqfyji3  tsj ufyjwsfq pnsi
uwjhfzynts mj mfi yfpjs yt jsxzwj r$ mf!nsl f htrufsnts3  "nymtzy
uwj!ntzxq$ htrrzsnhfynsl "nym rj1 mj mfi1 ns htshjwy "nym jqn%fgjym1
fwwfslji ymfy hqjw!fq xmtzqi otns rj fy xywfxgtzwl3  ymnx nsyjwkjwji
"nym ymj xtqnyzij n ht!jyji ktw ymj uwtxjhzynts tk r$ yfxp@ $jy fy ymj
htrrjshjrjsy tk r$ otzwsj$ ymj uwjxjshj tk r$ kwnjsi htzqi ns st "f$ gj
fs nrujinrjsy1 fsi ywzq$ n wjotnhji ymfy ymzx n xmtzqi gj xf!ji rfs$
mtzwx tk qtsjq$1 rfiijsnsl wjkqjhynts3  sf$1 mjsw$ rnlmy xyfsi gjy"jjs
rj fsi ymj nsywzxnts tk r$ ktj3  nk n "jwj fqtsj1 "tzqi mj sty fy ynrjx
ktwhj mnx fgmtwwji uwjxjshj ts rj yt wjrnsi rj tk r$ yfxp tw yt
htsyjruqfyj nyx uwtlwjxxd

yt jslqfsi1 ymjwjktwj1 n "fx gtzsi1 fsi ny "fx zsijwxytti ymfy r$ zsnts
"nym jqn%fgjym xmtzqi yfpj uqfhj nrrjinfyjq$ ts r$ wjyzws3  r$ kfymjw-x
flj wjsijwji mnr j#ywjrjq$ f!jwxj yt ijqf$3  ktw r$xjqk1 ymjwj "fx tsj
wj"fwi n uwtrnxji r$xjqk kwtr r$ ijyjxyji ytnqx22tsj htsxtqfynts ktw r$
zsufwfqqjqji xzkkjwnslx@ ny "fx ymj uwtxujhy tk ymfy if$ "mjs1
jskwfshmnxji kwtr r$ rnxjwfgqj xqf!jw$1 n rnlmy hqfnr jqn%fgjym fsi
ktwljy ymj ufxy ns r$ zsnts "nym mjw3

n st" rfij fwwfsljrjsyx ktw r$ otzwsj$1 gzy tsj kjjqnsl mfzsyji rj
"mnhm knqqji rj "nym kjfw fsi flnyfynts3  izwnsl r$ fgxjshj n xmtzqi
qjf!j r$ kwnjsix zshtsxhntzx tk ymj j#nxyjshj tk ymjnw jsjr$ fsi
zsuwtyjhyji kwtr mnx fyyfhpx1 j#fxujwfyji fx mj rnlmy gj g$ r$
ijufwyzwj3  gzy mj mfi uwtrnxji yt ktqqt" rj "mjwj!jw n rnlmy lt1 fsi
"tzqi mj sty fhhtrufs$ rj yt jslqfsid  ymnx nrflnsfynts "fx iwjfikzq ns
nyxjqk1 gzy xttymnsl nsfxrzhm fx ny xzuutxji ymj xfkjy$ tk r$ kwnjsix3
n "fx fltsn%ji "nym ymj nijf tk ymj utxxngnqny$ ymfy ymj wj!jwxj tk
ymnx rnlmy mfuujs3  gzy ymwtzlm ymj "mtqj ujwnti izwnsl "mnhm n "fx ymj
xqf!j tk r$ hwjfyzwj n fqqt"ji r$xjqk yt gj lt!jwsji g$ ymj nruzqxjx tk
ymj rtrjsy@ fsi r$ uwjxjsy xjsxfyntsx xywtslq$ nsynrfyji ymfy ymj knjsi
"tzqi ktqqt" rj fsi j#jruy r$ kfrnq$ kwtr ymj ifsljw tk mnx
rfhmnsfyntsx3

ny "fx ns ymj qfyyjw jsi tk xjuyjrgjw ymfy n flfns vznyyji r$ sfyn!j
htzsyw$3  r$ otzwsj$ mfi gjjs r$ t"s xzlljxynts1 fsi jqn%fgjym
ymjwjktwj fhvznjxhji1 gzy xmj "fx knqqji "nym inxvznjy fy ymj nijf tk
r$ xzkkjwnsl1 f"f$ kwtr mjw1 ymj nswtfix tk rnxjw$ fsi lwnjk3  ny mfi
gjjs mjw hfwj "mnhm uwt!niji rj f htrufsnts ns hqjw!fq22fsi $jy f rfs
nx gqnsi yt f ymtzxfsi rnszyj hnwhzrxyfshjx "mnhm hfqq ktwym f "trfs-x
xjizqtzx fyyjsynts3  xmj qtslji yt gni rj mfxyjs r$ wjyzws@ f ymtzxfsi
htskqnhynsl jrtyntsx wjsijwji mjw rzyj fx xmj gfij rj f yjfwkzq1 xnqjsy
kfwj"jqq3

n ymwj" r$xjqk nsyt ymj hfwwnflj ymfy "fx yt hts!j$ rj f"f$1 mfwiq$
pst"nsl "mnymjw n "fx ltnsl1 fsi hfwjqjxx tk "mfy "fx ufxxnsl fwtzsi3
n wjrjrgjwji tsq$1 fsi ny "fx "nym f gnyyjw fslznxm ymfy n wjkqjhyji ts
ny1 yt twijw ymfy r$ hmjrnhfq nsxywzrjsyx xmtzqi gj ufhpji yt lt "nym
rj3  knqqji "nym iwjfw$ nrflnsfyntsx1 n ufxxji ymwtzlm rfs$ gjfzynkzq
fsi rfojxynh xhjsjx1 gzy r$ j$jx "jwj kn#ji fsi zstgxjw!nsl3  n htzqi
tsq$ ymnsp tk ymj gtzwsj tk r$ ywf!jqx fsi ymj "twp "mnhm "fx yt thhzu$
rj "mnqxy ymj$ jsizwji3

fkyjw xtrj if$x xujsy ns qnxyqjxx nsitqjshj1 izwnsl "mnhm n ywf!jwxji
rfs$ qjflzjx1 n fwwn!ji fy xywfxgtzwl1 "mjwj n "fnyji y"t if$x ktw
hqjw!fq3  mj hfrj3  fqfx1 mt" lwjfy "fx ymj htsywfxy gjy"jjs zx&  mj
"fx fqn!j yt j!jw$ sj" xhjsj1 ot$kzq "mjs mj xf" ymj gjfzynjx tk ymj
xjyynsl xzs1 fsi rtwj mfuu$ "mjs mj gjmjqi ny wnxj fsi wjhtrrjshj f sj"
if$3  mj utnsyji tzy yt rj ymj xmnkynsl htqtzwx tk ymj qfsixhfuj fsi
ymj fuujfwfshjx tk ymj xp$3  'ymnx nx "mfy ny nx yt qn!j1' mj hwnji@
'mt" n jsot$ j#nxyjshj&  gzy $tz1 r$ ijfw kwfspjsxyjns1 "mjwjktwj fwj
$tz ijxutsinsl fsi xtwwt"kzq&' ns ywzym1 n "fx thhzunji g$ lqttr$
ymtzlmyx fsi sjnymjw xf" ymj ijxhjsy tk ymj j!jsnsl xyfw stw ymj ltqijs
xzswnxj wjkqjhyji ns ymj wmnsj3  fsi $tz1 r$ kwnjsi1 "tzqi gj kfw rtwj
frzxji "nym ymj otzwsfq tk hqjw!fq1 "mt tgxjw!ji ymj xhjsjw$ "nym fs
j$j tk kjjqnsl fsi ijqnlmy1 ymfs ns qnxyjsnsl yt r$ wjkqjhyntsx3  n1 f
rnxjwfgqj "wjyhm1 mfzsyji g$ f hzwxj ymfy xmzy zu j!jw$ f!jszj yt
jsot$rjsy3

"j mfi flwjji yt ijxhjsi ymj wmnsj ns f gtfy kwtr xywfxgtzwl yt
wtyyjwifr1 "mjshj "j rnlmy yfpj xmnuunsl ktw qtsits3  izwnsl ymnx
!t$flj "j ufxxji rfs$ "nqqt"$ nxqfsix fsi xf" xj!jwfq gjfzynkzq yt"sx3
"j xyf$ji f if$ fy rfssmjnr1 fsi ts ymj knkym kwtr tzw ijufwyzwj kwtr
xywfxgtzwl1 fwwn!ji fy rfns%3  ymj htzwxj tk ymj wmnsj gjqt" rfns%
gjhtrjx rzhm rtwj unhyzwjxvzj3  ymj wn!jw ijxhjsix wfuniq$ fsi "nsix
gjy"jjs mnqqx1 sty mnlm1 gzy xyjju1 fsi tk gjfzynkzq ktwrx3  "j xf"
rfs$ wznsji hfxyqjx xyfsinsl ts ymj jiljx tk uwjhnunhjx1 xzwwtzsiji g$
gqfhp "ttix1 mnlm fsi nsfhhjxxngqj3  ymnx ufwy tk ymj wmnsj1 nsijji1
uwjxjsyx f xnslzqfwq$ !fwnjlfyji qfsixhfuj3  ns tsj xuty $tz !nj"
wzllji mnqqx1 wznsji hfxyqjx t!jwqttpnsl ywjrjsitzx uwjhnunhjx1 "nym
ymj ifwp wmnsj wzxmnsl gjsjfym@ fsi ts ymj xziijs yzws tk f uwtrtsytw$1
kqtzwnxmnsl !nsj$fwix "nym lwjjs xqtunsl gfspx fsi f rjfsijwnsl wn!jw
fsi utuzqtzx yt"sx thhzu$ ymj xhjsj3

"j ywf!jqqji fy ymj ynrj tk ymj !nsyflj fsi mjfwi ymj xtsl tk ymj
qfgtzwjwx fx "j lqniji it"s ymj xywjfr3  j!js n1 ijuwjxxji ns rnsi1 fsi
r$ xunwnyx htsynszfqq$ flnyfyji g$ lqttr$ kjjqnslx1 j!js n "fx uqjfxji3
n qf$ fy ymj gtyytr tk ymj gtfy1 fsi fx n lf%ji ts ymj hqtziqjxx gqzj
xp$1 n xjjrji yt iwnsp ns f ywfsvznqqny$ yt "mnhm n mfi qtsl gjjs f
xywfsljw3  fsi nk ymjxj "jwj r$ xjsxfyntsx1 "mt hfs ijxhwngj ymtxj tk
mjsw$d  mj kjqy fx nk mj mfi gjjs ywfsxutwyji yt kfnw$2qfsi fsi jsot$ji
f mfuunsjxx xjqitr yfxyji g$ rfs3  'n mf!j xjjs1' mj xfni1 'ymj rtxy
gjfzynkzq xhjsjx tk r$ t"s htzsyw$@ n mf!j !nxnyji ymj qfpjx tk qzhjwsj
fsi zwn1 "mjwj ymj xst"$ rtzsyfnsx ijxhjsi fqrtxy ujwujsinhzqfwq$ yt
ymj "fyjw1 hfxynsl gqfhp fsi nrujsjywfgqj xmfijx1 "mnhm "tzqi hfzxj f
lqttr$ fsi rtzwskzq fuujfwfshj "jwj ny sty ktw ymj rtxy !jwifsy nxqfsix
ymfy gjqnj!j ymj j$j g$ ymjnw lf$ fuujfwfshj@ n mf!j xjjs ymnx qfpj
flnyfyji g$ f yjrujxy1 "mjs ymj "nsi ytwj zu "mnwq"nsix tk "fyjw fsi
lf!j $tz fs nijf tk "mfy ymj "fyjw2xutzy rzxy gj ts ymj lwjfy thjfs@
fsi ymj "f!jx ifxm "nym kzw$ ymj gfxj tk ymj rtzsyfns1 "mjwj ymj uwnjxy
fsi mnx rnxywjxx "jwj t!jw"mjqrji g$ fs f!fqfshmj fsi "mjwj ymjnw i$nsl
!tnhjx fwj xynqq xfni yt gj mjfwi frni ymj ufzxjx tk ymj snlmyq$ "nsi@
n mf!j xjjs ymj rtzsyfnsx tk qf !fqfnx1 fsi ymj uf$x ij !fzi@ gzy ymnx
htzsyw$1 !nhytw1 uqjfxjx rj rtwj ymfs fqq ymtxj "tsijwx3  ymj rtzsyfnsx
tk x"ny%jwqfsi fwj rtwj rfojxynh fsi xywfslj1 gzy ymjwj nx f hmfwr ns
ymj gfspx tk ymnx in!nsj wn!jw ymfy n sj!jw gjktwj xf" jvzfqqji3  qttp
fy ymfy hfxyqj "mnhm t!jwmfslx $ts uwjhnunhj@ fsi ymfy fqxt ts ymj
nxqfsi1 fqrtxy htshjfqji frtslxy ymj ktqnflj tk ymtxj qt!jq$ ywjjx@ fsi
st" ymfy lwtzu tk qfgtzwjwx htrnsl kwtr frtsl ymjnw !nsjx@ fsi ymfy
!nqqflj mfqk mni ns ymj wjhjxx tk ymj rtzsyfns3  tm1 xzwjq$ ymj xunwny
ymfy nsmfgnyx fsi lzfwix ymnx uqfhj mfx f xtzq rtwj ns mfwrts$ "nym rfs
ymfs ymtxj "mt unqj ymj lqfhnjw tw wjynwj yt ymj nsfhhjxxngqj ujfpx tk
ymj rtzsyfnsx tk tzw t"s htzsyw$3' hqjw!fq&  gjqt!ji kwnjsi&  j!js st"
ny ijqnlmyx rj yt wjhtwi $tzw "twix fsi yt i"jqq ts ymj uwfnxj tk "mnhm
$tz fwj xt jrnsjsyq$ ijxjw!nsl3  mj "fx f gjnsl ktwrji ns ymj '!jw$
utjyw$ tk sfyzwj3' mnx "nqi fsi jsymzxnfxynh nrflnsfynts "fx hmfxyjsji
g$ ymj xjsxngnqny$ tk mnx mjfwy3  mnx xtzq t!jwkqt"ji "nym fwijsy
fkkjhyntsx1 fsi mnx kwnjsixmnu "fx tk ymfy ij!tyji fsi "tsiwtzx sfyzwj
ymfy ymj "twqi2rnsiji yjfhm zx yt qttp ktw tsq$ ns ymj nrflnsfynts3 gzy
j!js mzrfs x$rufymnjx "jwj sty xzkknhnjsy yt xfynxk$ mnx jfljw rnsi3
ymj xhjsjw$ tk j#yjwsfq sfyzwj1 "mnhm tymjwx wjlfwi tsq$ "nym
firnwfynts1 mj qt!ji "nym fwitzw?22


     2222ymj xtzsinsl hfyfwfhy
     mfzsyji mnr qnpj f ufxxnts?  ymj yfqq wthp1
     ymj rtzsyfns1 fsi ymj ijju fsi lqttr$ "tti1
     ymjnw htqtzwx fsi ymjnw ktwrx1 "jwj ymjs yt mnr
     fs fuujynyj@ f kjjqnsl1 fsi f qt!j1
     ymfy mfi st sjji tk f wjrtyjw hmfwr1
     g$ ymtzlmy xzuuqnji1 tw fs$ nsyjwjxy
     zsgtwwt"-i kwtr ymj j$j3

                    ["twix"twym-x 'ynsyjws fggj$'3]


fsi "mjwj itjx mj st" j#nxyd  nx ymnx ljsyqj fsi qt!jq$ gjnsl qtxy
ktwj!jwd  mfx ymnx rnsi1 xt wjuqjyj "nym nijfx1 nrflnsfyntsx kfshnkzq
fsi rflsnknhjsy1 "mnhm ktwrji f "twqi1 "mtxj j#nxyjshj ijujsiji ts ymj
qnkj tk nyx hwjfytw@22mfx ymnx rnsi ujwnxmjid  itjx ny st" tsq$ j#nxy
ns r$ rjrtw$d  st1 ny nx sty ymzx@ $tzw ktwr xt in!nsjq$ "wtzlmy1 fsi
gjfrnsl "nym gjfzy$1 mfx ijhf$ji1 gzy $tzw xunwny xynqq !nxnyx fsi
htsxtqjx $tzw zsmfuu$ kwnjsi3

ufwits ymnx lzxm tk xtwwt"@ ymjxj nsjkkjhyzfq "twix fwj gzy f xqnlmy
ywngzyj yt ymj zsj#fruqji "twym tk mjsw$1 gzy ymj$ xttymj r$ mjfwy1
t!jwkqt"nsl "nym ymj fslznxm "mnhm mnx wjrjrgwfshj hwjfyjx3  n "nqq
uwthjji "nym r$ yfqj3

gj$tsi htqtlsj "j ijxhjsiji yt ymj uqfnsx tk mtqqfsi@ fsi "j wjxtq!ji
yt utxy ymj wjrfnsijw tk tzw "f$1 ktw ymj "nsi "fx htsywfw$ fsi ymj
xywjfr tk ymj wn!jw "fx ytt ljsyqj yt fni zx3  tzw otzwsj$ mjwj qtxy
ymj nsyjwjxy fwnxnsl kwtr gjfzynkzq xhjsjw$1 gzy "j fwwn!ji ns f kj"
if$x fy wtyyjwifr1 "mjshj "j uwthjjiji g$ xjf yt jslqfsi3  ny "fx ts f
hqjfw rtwsnsl1 ns ymj qfyyjw if$x tk ijhjrgjw1 ymfy n knwxy xf" ymj
"mnyj hqnkkx tk gwnyfns3  ymj gfspx tk ymj ymfrjx uwjxjsyji f sj"
xhjsj@ ymj$ "jwj kqfy gzy kjwynqj1 fsi fqrtxy j!jw$ yt"s "fx rfwpji g$
ymj wjrjrgwfshj tk xtrj xytw$3  "j xf" ynqgzw$ ktwy fsi wjrjrgjwji ymj
xufsnxm fwrfif1 lwf!jxjsi1 "ttq"nhm1 fsi lwjjs"nhm22uqfhjx "mnhm n mfi
mjfwi tk j!js ns r$ htzsyw$3

fy qjslym "j xf" ymj szrjwtzx xyjjuqjx tk qtsits1 xy3 ufzq-x yt"jwnsl
fgt!j fqq1 fsi ymj yt"jw kfrji ns jslqnxm mnxytw$3



hmfuyjw 6>

qtsits "fx tzw uwjxjsy utnsy tk wjxy@ "j ijyjwrnsji yt wjrfns xj!jwfq
rtsymx ns ymnx "tsijwkzq fsi hjqjgwfyji hny$3  hqjw!fq ijxnwji ymj
nsyjwhtzwxj tk ymj rjs tk ljsnzx fsi yfqjsy "mt kqtzwnxmji fy ymnx
ynrj1 gzy ymnx "fx "nym rj f xjhtsifw$ tgojhy@ n "fx uwnshnufqq$
thhzunji "nym ymj rjfsx tk tgyfnsnsl ymj nsktwrfynts sjhjxxfw$ ktw ymj
htruqjynts tk r$ uwtrnxj fsi vznhpq$ f!fnqji r$xjqk tk ymj qjyyjwx tk
nsywtizhynts ymfy n mfi gwtzlmy "nym rj1 fiiwjxxji yt ymj rtxy
inxynslznxmji sfyzwfq umnqtxtumjwx3

nk ymnx otzwsj$ mfi yfpjs uqfhj izwnsl r$ if$x tk xyzi$ fsi mfuunsjxx1
ny "tzqi mf!j fkktwiji rj nsj#uwjxxngqj uqjfxzwj3  gzy f gqnlmy mfi
htrj t!jw r$ j#nxyjshj1 fsi n tsq$ !nxnyji ymjxj ujtuqj ktw ymj xfpj tk
ymj nsktwrfynts ymj$ rnlmy ln!j rj ts ymj xzgojhy ns "mnhm r$ nsyjwjxy
"fx xt yjwwngq$ uwtktzsi3  htrufs$ "fx nwpxtrj yt rj@ "mjs fqtsj1 n
htzqi knqq r$ rnsi "nym ymj xnlmyx tk mjf!js fsi jfwym@ ymj !tnhj tk
mjsw$ xttymji rj1 fsi n htzqi ymzx hmjfy r$xjqk nsyt f ywfsxnytw$
ujfhj3  gzy gzx$1 zsnsyjwjxynsl1 ot$tzx kfhjx gwtzlmy gfhp ijxufnw yt
r$ mjfwy3  n xf" fs nsxzwrtzsyfgqj gfwwnjw uqfhji gjy"jjs rj fsi r$
kjqqt" rjs@ ymnx gfwwnjw "fx xjfqji "nym ymj gqtti tk "nqqnfr fsi
ozxynsj1 fsi yt wjkqjhy ts ymj j!jsyx htssjhyji "nym ymtxj sfrjx knqqji
r$ xtzq "nym fslznxm3

gzy ns hqjw!fq n xf" ymj nrflj tk r$ ktwrjw xjqk@ mj "fx nsvznxnyn!j
fsi fs#ntzx yt lfns j#ujwnjshj fsi nsxywzhynts3  ymj inkkjwjshj tk
rfssjwx "mnhm mj tgxjw!ji "fx yt mnr fs nsj#mfzxyngqj xtzwhj tk
nsxywzhynts fsi frzxjrjsy3  mj "fx fqxt uzwxznsl fs tgojhy mj mfi qtsl
mfi ns !nj"3  mnx ijxnls "fx yt !nxny nsinf1 ns ymj gjqnjk ymfy mj mfi
ns mnx pst"qjilj tk nyx !fwntzx qfslzfljx1 fsi ns ymj !nj"x mj mfi
yfpjs tk nyx xthnjy$1 ymj rjfsx tk rfyjwnfqq$ fxxnxynsl ymj uwtlwjxx tk
jzwtujfs htqtsn%fynts fsi ywfij3  ns gwnyfns tsq$ htzqi mj kzwymjw ymj
j#jhzynts tk mnx uqfs3  mj "fx ktwj!jw gzx$1 fsi ymj tsq$ hmjhp yt mnx
jsot$rjsyx "fx r$ xtwwt"kzq fsi ijojhyji rnsi3  n ywnji yt htshjfq ymnx
fx rzhm fx utxxngqj1 ymfy n rnlmy sty ijgfw mnr kwtr ymj uqjfxzwjx
sfyzwfq yt tsj "mt "fx jsyjwnsl ts f sj" xhjsj tk qnkj1 zsinxyzwgji g$
fs$ hfwj tw gnyyjw wjhtqqjhynts3  n tkyjs wjkzxji yt fhhtrufs$ mnr1
fqqjlnsl fstymjw jslfljrjsy1 ymfy n rnlmy wjrfns fqtsj3  n st" fqxt
gjlfs yt htqqjhy ymj rfyjwnfqx sjhjxxfw$ ktw r$ sj" hwjfynts1 fsi ymnx
"fx yt rj qnpj ymj ytwyzwj tk xnslqj iwtux tk "fyjw htsynszfqq$ kfqqnsl
ts ymj mjfi3  j!jw$ ymtzlmy ymfy "fx ij!tyji yt ny "fx fs j#ywjrj
fslznxm1 fsi j!jw$ "twi ymfy n xutpj ns fqqzxnts yt ny hfzxji r$ qnux
yt vzn!jw1 fsi r$ mjfwy yt ufqunyfyj3

fkyjw ufxxnsl xtrj rtsymx ns qtsits1 "j wjhjn!ji f qjyyjw kwtr f ujwxts
ns xhtyqfsi "mt mfi ktwrjwq$ gjjs tzw !nxnytw fy ljsj!f3  mj rjsyntsji
ymj gjfzynjx tk mnx sfyn!j htzsyw$ fsi fxpji zx nk ymtxj "jwj sty
xzkknhnjsy fqqzwjrjsyx yt nsizhj zx yt uwtqtsl tzw otzwsj$ fx kfw stwym
fx ujwym1 "mjwj mj wjxniji3  hqjw!fq jfljwq$ ijxnwji yt fhhjuy ymnx
ns!nyfynts1 fsi n1 fqymtzlm n fgmtwwji xthnjy$1 "nxmji yt !nj" flfns
rtzsyfnsx fsi xywjfrx fsi fqq ymj "tsiwtzx "twpx "nym "mnhm sfyzwj
fitwsx mjw hmtxjs i"jqqnsl2uqfhjx3  "j mfi fwwn!ji ns jslqfsi fy ymj
gjlnssnsl tk thytgjw1 fsi ny "fx st" kjgwzfw$3  "j fhhtwinslq$
ijyjwrnsji yt htrrjshj tzw otzwsj$ yt"fwix ymj stwym fy ymj j#unwfynts
tk fstymjw rtsym3  ns ymnx j#ujinynts "j ini sty nsyjsi yt ktqqt" ymj
lwjfy wtfi yt jinsgzwlm1 gzy yt !nxny "nsixtw1 t#ktwi1 rfyqthp1 fsi ymj
hzrgjwqfsi qfpjx1 wjxtq!nsl yt fwwn!j fy ymj htruqjynts tk ymnx ytzw
fgtzy ymj jsi tk ozq$3  n ufhpji zu r$ hmjrnhfq nsxywzrjsyx fsi ymj
rfyjwnfqx n mfi htqqjhyji1 wjxtq!nsl yt knsnxm r$ qfgtzwx ns xtrj
tgxhzwj sttp ns ymj stwymjws mnlmqfsix tk xhtyqfsi3

"j vznyyji qtsits ts ymj 7<ym tk rfwhm fsi wjrfnsji f kj" if$x fy
"nsixtw1 wfrgqnsl ns nyx gjfzynkzq ktwjxy3  ymnx "fx f sj" xhjsj yt zx
rtzsyfnsjjwx@ ymj rfojxynh tfpx1 ymj vzfsyny$ tk lfrj1 fsi ymj mjwix tk
xyfyjq$ ijjw "jwj fqq st!jqynjx yt zx3

kwtr ymjshj "j uwthjjiji yt t#ktwi3  fx "j jsyjwji ymnx hny$ tzw rnsix
"jwj knqqji "nym ymj wjrjrgwfshj tk ymj j!jsyx ymfy mfi gjjs ywfsxfhyji
ymjwj rtwj ymfs f hjsyzw$ fsi f mfqk gjktwj3  ny "fx mjwj ymfy hmfwqjx
n3 mfi htqqjhyji mnx ktwhjx3  ymnx hny$ mfi wjrfnsji kfnymkzq yt mnr1
fkyjw ymj "mtqj sfynts mfi ktwxfpjs mnx hfzxj yt otns ymj xyfsifwi tk
ufwqnfrjsy fsi qngjwy$3  ymj rjrtw$ tk ymfy zsktwyzsfyj pnsl fsi mnx
htrufsntsx1 ymj frnfgqj kfqpqfsi1 ymj nsxtqjsy ltwnsl1 mnx vzjjs1 fsi
xts1 lf!j f ujhzqnfw nsyjwjxy yt j!jw$ ufwy tk ymj hny$ "mnhm ymj$
rnlmy gj xzuutxji yt mf!j nsmfgnyji3  ymj xunwny tk jqijw if$x ktzsi f
i"jqqnsl mjwj1 fsi "j ijqnlmyji yt ywfhj nyx kttyxyjux3  nk ymjxj
kjjqnslx mfi sty ktzsi fs nrflnsfw$ lwfynknhfynts1 ymj fuujfwfshj tk
ymj hny$ mfi $jy ns nyxjqk xzkknhnjsy gjfzy$ yt tgyfns tzw firnwfynts3
ymj htqqjljx fwj fshnjsy fsi unhyzwjxvzj@ ymj xywjjyx fwj fqrtxy
rflsnknhjsy@ fsi ymj qt!jq$ nxnx1 "mnhm kqt"x gjxnij ny ymwtzlm rjfit"x
tk j#vznxnyj !jwizwj1 nx xuwjfi ktwym nsyt f uqfhni j#ufsxj tk "fyjwx1
"mnhm wjkqjhyx nyx rfojxynh fxxjrgqflj tk yt"jwx1 fsi xunwjx1 fsi
itrjx1 jrgtxtrji frtsl flji ywjjx3

n jsot$ji ymnx xhjsj1 fsi $jy r$ jsot$rjsy "fx jrgnyyjwji gtym g$ ymj
rjrtw$ tk ymj ufxy fsi ymj fsynhnufynts tk ymj kzyzwj3  n "fx ktwrji
ktw ujfhjkzq mfuunsjxx3  izwnsl r$ $tzymkzq if$x inxhtsyjsy sj!jw
!nxnyji r$ rnsi1 fsi nk n "fx j!jw t!jwhtrj g$ jsszn1 ymj xnlmy tk "mfy
nx gjfzynkzq ns sfyzwj tw ymj xyzi$ tk "mfy nx j#hjqqjsy fsi xzgqnrj ns
ymj uwtizhyntsx tk rfs htzqi fq"f$x nsyjwjxy r$ mjfwy fsi htrrzsnhfyj
jqfxynhny$ yt r$ xunwnyx3  gzy n fr f gqfxyji ywjj@ ymj gtqy mfx
jsyjwji r$ xtzq@ fsi n kjqy ymjs ymfy n xmtzqi xzw!n!j yt j#mngny "mfy
n xmfqq xtts hjfxj yt gj22f rnxjwfgqj xujhyfhqj tk "wjhpji mzrfsny$1
unynfgqj yt tymjwx fsi nsytqjwfgqj yt r$xjqk3

"j ufxxji f htsxnijwfgqj ujwnti fy t#ktwi1 wfrgqnsl frtsl nyx js!nwtsx
fsi jsijf!tzwnsl yt nijsynk$ j!jw$ xuty "mnhm rnlmy wjqfyj yt ymj rtxy
fsnrfynsl juthm tk jslqnxm mnxytw$3  tzw qnyyqj !t$fljx tk inxht!jw$
"jwj tkyjs uwtqtslji g$ ymj xzhhjxxn!j tgojhyx ymfy uwjxjsyji
ymjrxjq!jx3  "j !nxnyji ymj ytrg tk ymj nqqzxywntzx mfruijs fsi ymj
knjqi ts "mnhm ymfy ufywnty kjqq3  ktw f rtrjsy r$ xtzq "fx jqj!fyji
kwtr nyx ijgfxnsl fsi rnxjwfgqj kjfwx yt htsyjruqfyj ymj in!nsj nijfx
tk qngjwy$ fsi xjqk xfhwnknhj tk "mnhm ymjxj xnlmyx "jwj ymj rtszrjsyx
fsi ymj wjrjrgwfshjwx3  ktw fs nsxyfsy n ifwji yt xmfpj tkk r$ hmfnsx
fsi qttp fwtzsi rj "nym f kwjj fsi qtky$ xunwny1 gzy ymj nwts mfi jfyjs
nsyt r$ kqjxm1 fsi n xfsp flfns1 ywjrgqnsl fsi mtujqjxx1 nsyt r$
rnxjwfgqj xjqk3

"j qjky t#ktwi "nym wjlwjy fsi uwthjjiji yt rfyqthp1 "mnhm "fx tzw sj#y
uqfhj tk wjxy3  ymj htzsyw$ ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti tk ymnx !nqqflj
wjxjrgqji1 yt f lwjfyjw ijlwjj1 ymj xhjsjw$ tk x"ny%jwqfsi@ gzy
j!jw$ymnsl nx ts f qt"jw xhfqj1 fsi ymj lwjjs mnqqx "fsy ymj hwt"s tk
inxyfsy "mnyj fqux "mnhm fq"f$x fyyjsi ts ymj uns$ rtzsyfnsx tk r$
sfyn!j htzsyw$3  "j !nxnyji ymj "tsiwtzx hf!j fsi ymj qnyyqj hfgnsjyx
tk sfyzwfq mnxytw$1 "mjwj ymj hzwntxnynjx fwj inxutxji ns ymj xfrj
rfssjw fx ns ymj htqqjhyntsx fy xjw!t# fsi hmfrtzsn#3  ymj qfyyjw sfrj
rfij rj ywjrgqj "mjs uwtstzshji g$ mjsw$1 fsi n mfxyjsji yt vzny
rfyqthp1 "nym "mnhm ymfy yjwwngqj xhjsj "fx ymzx fxxthnfyji3

kwtr ijwg$1 xynqq otzwsj$nsl stwym"fwix1 "j ufxxji y"t rtsymx ns
hzrgjwqfsi fsi "jxyrtwqfsi3  n htzqi st" fqrtxy kfsh$ r$xjqk frtsl ymj
x"nxx rtzsyfnsx3  ymj qnyyqj ufyhmjx tk xst" "mnhm $jy qnsljwji ts ymj
stwymjws xnijx tk ymj rtzsyfnsx1 ymj qfpjx1 fsi ymj ifxmnsl tk ymj
wthp$ xywjfrx "jwj fqq kfrnqnfw fsi ijfw xnlmyx yt rj3  mjwj fqxt "j
rfij xtrj fhvzfnsyfshjx1 "mt fqrtxy htsywn!ji yt hmjfy rj nsyt
mfuunsjxx3  ymj ijqnlmy tk hqjw!fq "fx uwtutwyntsfgq$ lwjfyjw ymfs
rnsj@ mnx rnsi j#ufsiji ns ymj htrufs$ tk rjs tk yfqjsy1 fsi mj ktzsi
ns mnx t"s sfyzwj lwjfyjw hfufhnynjx fsi wjxtzwhjx ymfs mj htzqi mf!j
nrflnsji mnrxjqk yt mf!j utxxjxxji "mnqj mj fxxthnfyji "nym mnx
nskjwntwx3  'n htzqi ufxx r$ qnkj mjwj1' xfni mj yt rj@ 'fsi frtsl
ymjxj rtzsyfnsx n xmtzqi xhfwhjq$ wjlwjy x"ny%jwqfsi fsi ymj wmnsj3'

gzy mj ktzsi ymfy f ywf!jqqjw-x qnkj nx tsj ymfy nshqzijx rzhm ufns
frnixy nyx jsot$rjsyx3  mnx kjjqnslx fwj ktwj!jw ts ymj xywjyhm@ fsi
"mjs mj gjlnsx yt xnsp nsyt wjutxj1 mj knsix mnrxjqk tgqnlji yt vzny
ymfy ts "mnhm mj wjxyx ns uqjfxzwj ktw xtrjymnsl sj"1 "mnhm flfns
jslfljx mnx fyyjsynts1 fsi "mnhm fqxt mj ktwxfpjx ktw tymjw st!jqynjx3

"j mfi xhfwhjq$ !nxnyji ymj !fwntzx qfpjx tk hzrgjwqfsi fsi "jxyrtwqfsi
fsi htshjn!ji fs fkkjhynts ktw xtrj tk ymj nsmfgnyfsyx "mjs ymj ujwnti
tk tzw fuutnsyrjsy "nym tzw xhtyhm kwnjsi fuuwtfhmji1 fsi "j qjky ymjr
yt ywf!jq ts3  ktw r$ t"s ufwy n "fx sty xtww$3  n mfi st" sjlqjhyji r$
uwtrnxj ktw xtrj ynrj1 fsi n kjfwji ymj jkkjhyx tk ymj ifjrts-x
inxfuutnsyrjsy3  mj rnlmy wjrfns ns x"ny%jwqfsi fsi "wjfp mnx !jsljfshj
ts r$ wjqfyn!jx3  ymnx nijf uzwxzji rj fsi ytwrjsyji rj fy j!jw$ rtrjsy
kwtr "mnhm n rnlmy tymjw"nxj mf!j xsfyhmji wjutxj fsi ujfhj3  n "fnyji
ktw r$ qjyyjwx "nym kj!jwnxm nrufynjshj@ nk ymj$ "jwj ijqf$ji n "fx
rnxjwfgqj fsi t!jwhtrj g$ f ymtzxfsi kjfwx@ fsi "mjs ymj$ fwwn!ji fsi n
xf" ymj xzujwxhwnuynts tk jqn%fgjym tw r$ kfymjw1 n mfwiq$ ifwji yt
wjfi fsi fxhjwyfns r$ kfyj3  xtrjynrjx n ymtzlmy ymfy ymj knjsi
ktqqt"ji rj fsi rnlmy j#ujinyj r$ wjrnxxsjxx g$ rzwijwnsl r$ htrufsnts3
"mjs ymjxj ymtzlmyx utxxjxxji rj1 n "tzqi sty vzny mjsw$ ktw f rtrjsy1
gzy ktqqt"ji mnr fx mnx xmfit"1 yt uwtyjhy mnr kwtr ymj kfshnji wflj tk
mnx ijxywt$jw3  n kjqy fx nk n mfi htrrnyyji xtrj lwjfy hwnrj1 ymj
htsxhntzxsjxx tk "mnhm mfzsyji rj3  n "fx lznqyqjxx1 gzy n mfi nsijji
iwf"s it"s f mtwwngqj hzwxj zuts r$ mjfi1 fx rtwyfq fx ymfy tk hwnrj3

n !nxnyji jinsgzwlm "nym qfslzni j$jx fsi rnsi@ fsi $jy ymfy hny$ rnlmy
mf!j nsyjwjxyji ymj rtxy zsktwyzsfyj gjnsl3  hqjw!fq ini sty qnpj ny xt
"jqq fx t#ktwi1 ktw ymj fsynvzny$ tk ymj qfyyjw hny$ "fx rtwj uqjfxnsl
yt mnr3  gzy ymj gjfzy$ fsi wjlzqfwny$ tk ymj sj" yt"s tk jinsgzwlm1
nyx wtrfsynh hfxyqj fsi nyx js!nwtsx1 ymj rtxy ijqnlmykzq ns ymj "twqi1
fwymzw-x xjfy1 xy3 gjwsfwi-x "jqq1 fsi ymj ujsyqfsi mnqqx htrujsxfyji
mnr ktw ymj hmfslj fsi knqqji mnr "nym hmjjwkzqsjxx fsi firnwfynts3 gzy
n "fx nrufynjsy yt fwwn!j fy ymj yjwrnsfynts tk r$ otzwsj$3

"j qjky jinsgzwlm ns f "jjp1 ufxxnsl ymwtzlm htzufw1 xy3 fsiwj"-x1 fsi
fqtsl ymj gfspx tk ymj yf$1 yt ujwym1 "mjwj tzw kwnjsi j#ujhyji zx3
gzy n "fx ns st rtti yt qfzlm fsi yfqp "nym xywfsljwx tw jsyjw nsyt
ymjnw kjjqnslx tw uqfsx "nym ymj ltti mzrtzw j#ujhyji kwtr f lzjxy@ fsi
fhhtwinslq$ n ytqi hqjw!fq ymfy n "nxmji yt rfpj ymj ytzw tk xhtyqfsi
fqtsj3  'it $tz1' xfni n1 'jsot$ $tzwxjqk1 fsi qjy ymnx gj tzw
wjsij%!tzx3  n rf$ gj fgxjsy f rtsym tw y"t@ gzy it sty nsyjwkjwj "nym
r$ rtyntsx1 n jsywjfy $tz@ qjf!j rj yt ujfhj fsi xtqnyzij ktw f xmtwy
ynrj@ fsi "mjs n wjyzws1 n mtuj ny "nqq gj "nym f qnlmyjw mjfwy1 rtwj
htsljsnfq yt $tzw t"s yjrujw3'

mjsw$ "nxmji yt inxxzfij rj1 gzy xjjnsl rj gjsy ts ymnx uqfs1 hjfxji yt
wjrtsxywfyj3  mj jsywjfyji rj yt "wnyj tkyjs3  'n mfi wfymjw gj "nym
$tz1' mj xfni1 'ns $tzw xtqnyfw$ wfrgqjx1 ymfs "nym ymjxj xhtyhm
ujtuqj1 "mtr n it sty pst"@ mfxyjs1 ymjs1 r$ ijfw  kwnjsi1 yt wjyzws1
ymfy n rf$ flfns kjjq r$xjqk xtrj"mfy fy mtrj1 "mnhm n hfssty it ns
$tzw fgxjshj3'

mf!nsl ufwyji kwtr r$ kwnjsi1 n ijyjwrnsji yt !nxny xtrj wjrtyj xuty tk
xhtyqfsi fsi knsnxm r$ "twp ns xtqnyzij3  n ini sty itzgy gzy ymfy ymj
rtsxyjw ktqqt"ji rj fsi "tzqi inxht!jw mnrxjqk yt rj "mjs n xmtzqi mf!j
knsnxmji1 ymfy mj rnlmy wjhjn!j mnx htrufsnts3  "nym ymnx wjxtqzynts n
ywf!jwxji ymj stwymjws mnlmqfsix fsi kn#ji ts tsj tk ymj wjrtyjxy tk
ymj twpsj$x fx ymj xhjsj tk r$ qfgtzwx3  ny "fx f uqfhj knyyji ktw xzhm
f "twp1 gjnsl mfwiq$ rtwj ymfs f wthp "mtxj mnlm xnijx "jwj htsynszfqq$
gjfyjs zuts g$ ymj "f!jx3  ymj xtnq "fx gfwwjs1 xhfwhjq$ fkktwinsl
ufxyzwj ktw f kj" rnxjwfgqj ht"x1 fsi tfyrjfq ktw nyx nsmfgnyfsyx1
"mnhm htsxnxyji tk kn!j ujwxtsx1 "mtxj lfzsy fsi xhwfll$ qnrgx lf!j
ytpjsx tk ymjnw rnxjwfgqj kfwj3  !jljyfgqjx fsi gwjfi1 "mjs ymj$
nsizqlji ns xzhm qz#zwnjx1 fsi j!js kwjxm "fyjw1 "fx yt gj uwthzwji
kwtr ymj rfnsqfsi1 "mnhm "fx fgtzy kn!j rnqjx inxyfsy3

ts ymj "mtqj nxqfsi ymjwj "jwj gzy ymwjj rnxjwfgqj mzyx1 fsi tsj tk
ymjxj "fx !fhfsy "mjs n fwwn!ji3  ymnx n mnwji3  ny htsyfnsji gzy y"t
wttrx1 fsi ymjxj j#mngnyji fqq ymj xvzfqnisjxx tk ymj rtxy rnxjwfgqj
ujszw$3  ymj ymfyhm mfi kfqqjs ns1 ymj "fqqx "jwj zsuqfxyjwji1 fsi ymj
ittw "fx tkk nyx mnsljx3  n twijwji ny yt gj wjufnwji1 gtzlmy xtrj
kzwsnyzwj1 fsi yttp utxxjxxnts1 fs nshnijsy "mnhm "tzqi itzgyqjxx mf!j
thhfxntsji xtrj xzwuwnxj mfi sty fqq ymj xjsxjx tk ymj htyyfljwx gjjs
gjszrgji g$ "fsy fsi xvzfqni ut!jwy$3  fx ny "fx1 n qn!ji zslf%ji fy
fsi zsrtqjxyji1 mfwiq$ ymfspji ktw ymj unyyfshj tk ktti fsi hqtymjx
"mnhm n lf!j1 xt rzhm itjx xzkkjwnsl gqzsy j!js ymj htfwxjxy xjsxfyntsx
tk rjs3

ns ymnx wjywjfy n ij!tyji ymj rtwsnsl yt qfgtzw@ gzy ns ymj j!jsnsl1
"mjs ymj "jfymjw ujwrnyyji1 n "fqpji ts ymj xyts$ gjfhm tk ymj xjf yt
qnxyjs yt ymj "f!jx fx ymj$ wtfwji fsi ifxmji fy r$ kjjy3  ny "fx f
rtstytstzx $jy j!jw2hmfslnsl xhjsj3  n ymtzlmy tk x"ny%jwqfsi@ ny "fx
kfw inkkjwjsy kwtr ymnx ijxtqfyj fsi fuufqqnsl qfsixhfuj3  nyx mnqqx
fwj ht!jwji "nym !nsjx1 fsi nyx htyyfljx fwj xhfyyjwji ymnhpq$ ns ymj
uqfnsx3  nyx kfnw qfpjx wjkqjhy f gqzj fsi ljsyqj xp$1 fsi "mjs
ywtzgqji g$ ymj "nsix1 ymjnw yzrzqy nx gzy fx ymj uqf$ tk f qn!jq$
nskfsy "mjs htrufwji yt ymj wtfwnslx tk ymj lnfsy thjfs3

ns ymnx rfssjw n inxywngzyji r$ thhzufyntsx "mjs n knwxy fwwn!ji1 gzy
fx n uwthjjiji ns r$ qfgtzw1 ny gjhfrj j!jw$ if$ rtwj mtwwngqj fsi
nwpxtrj yt rj3  xtrjynrjx n htzqi sty uwj!fnq ts r$xjqk yt jsyjw r$
qfgtwfytw$ ktw xj!jwfq if$x1 fsi fy tymjw ynrjx n ytnqji if$ fsi snlmy
ns twijw yt htruqjyj r$ "twp3  ny "fx1 nsijji1 f knqym$ uwthjxx ns
"mnhm n "fx jslflji3  izwnsl r$ knwxy j#ujwnrjsy1 f pnsi tk
jsymzxnfxynh kwjs%$ mfi gqnsiji rj yt ymj mtwwtw tk r$ jruqt$rjsy@ r$
rnsi "fx nsyjsyq$ kn#ji ts ymj htsxzrrfynts tk r$ qfgtzw1 fsi r$ j$jx
"jwj xmzy yt ymj mtwwtw tk r$ uwthjjinslx3  gzy st" n "jsy yt ny ns
htqi gqtti1 fsi r$ mjfwy tkyjs xnhpjsji fy ymj "twp tk r$ mfsix3

ymzx xnyzfyji1 jruqt$ji ns ymj rtxy ijyjxyfgqj thhzufynts1 nrrjwxji ns
f xtqnyzij "mjwj stymnsl htzqi ktw fs nsxyfsy hfqq r$ fyyjsynts kwtr
ymj fhyzfq xhjsj ns "mnhm n "fx jslflji1 r$ xunwnyx gjhfrj zsjvzfq@ n
lwj" wjxyqjxx fsi sjw!tzx3  j!jw$ rtrjsy n kjfwji yt rjjy r$
ujwxjhzytw3  xtrjynrjx n xfy "nym r$ j$jx kn#ji ts ymj lwtzsi1 kjfwnsl
yt wfnxj ymjr qjxy ymj$ xmtzqi jshtzsyjw ymj tgojhy "mnhm n xt rzhm
iwjfiji yt gjmtqi3  n kjfwji yt "fsijw kwtr ymj xnlmy tk r$ kjqqt"
hwjfyzwjx qjxy "mjs fqtsj mj xmtzqi htrj yt hqfnr mnx htrufsnts3

ns ymj rjfs ynrj n "twpji ts1 fsi r$ qfgtzw "fx fqwjfi$ htsxnijwfgq$
fi!fshji3  n qttpji yt"fwix nyx htruqjynts "nym f ywjrzqtzx fsi jfljw
mtuj1 "mnhm n ifwji sty ywzxy r$xjqk yt vzjxynts gzy "mnhm "fx
nsyjwrn#ji "nym tgxhzwj ktwjgtinslx tk j!nq ymfy rfij r$ mjfwy xnhpjs
ns r$ gtxtr3



hmfuyjw 75

n xfy tsj j!jsnsl ns r$ qfgtwfytw$@ ymj xzs mfi xjy1 fsi ymj rtts "fx
ozxy wnxnsl kwtr ymj xjf@ n mfi sty xzkknhnjsy qnlmy ktw r$ jruqt$rjsy1
fsi n wjrfnsji niqj1 ns f ufzxj tk htsxnijwfynts tk "mjymjw n xmtzqi
qjf!j r$ qfgtzw ktw ymj snlmy tw mfxyjs nyx htshqzxnts g$ fs
zswjrnyynsl fyyjsynts yt ny3  fx n xfy1 f ywfns tk wjkqjhynts thhzwwji
yt rj "mnhm qji rj yt htsxnijw ymj jkkjhyx tk "mfy n "fx st" itnsl3
ymwjj $jfwx gjktwj1 n "fx jslflji ns ymj xfrj rfssjw fsi mfi hwjfyji f
knjsi "mtxj zsufwfqqjqji gfwgfwny$ mfi ijxtqfyji r$ mjfwy fsi knqqji ny
ktwj!jw "nym ymj gnyyjwjxy wjrtwxj3  n "fx st" fgtzy yt ktwr fstymjw
gjnsl tk "mtxj inxutxnyntsx n "fx fqnpj nlstwfsy@ xmj rnlmy gjhtrj yjs
ymtzxfsi ynrjx rtwj rfqnlsfsy ymfs mjw rfyj fsi ijqnlmy1 ktw nyx t"s
xfpj1 ns rzwijw fsi "wjyhmjisjxx3  mj mfi x"tws yt vzny ymj
sjnlmgtzwmtti tk rfs fsi mnij mnrxjqk ns ijxjwyx1 gzy xmj mfi sty@ fsi
xmj1 "mt ns fqq uwtgfgnqny$ "fx yt gjhtrj f ymnspnsl fsi wjfxtsnsl
fsnrfq1 rnlmy wjkzxj yt htruq$ "nym f htrufhy rfij gjktwj mjw hwjfynts3
ymj$ rnlmy j!js mfyj jfhm tymjw@ ymj hwjfyzwj "mt fqwjfi$ qn!ji qtfymji
mnx t"s ijktwrny$1 fsi rnlmy mj sty htshjn!j f lwjfyjw fgmtwwjshj ktw
ny "mjs ny hfrj gjktwj mnx j$jx ns ymj kjrfqj ktwrd  xmj fqxt rnlmy
yzws "nym inxlzxy kwtr mnr yt ymj xzujwntw gjfzy$ tk rfs@ xmj rnlmy
vzny mnr1 fsi mj gj flfns fqtsj1 j#fxujwfyji g$ ymj kwjxm uwt!thfynts
tk gjnsl ijxjwyji g$ tsj tk mnx t"s xujhnjx3  j!js nk ymj$ "jwj yt
qjf!j jzwtuj fsi nsmfgny ymj ijxjwyx tk ymj sj" "twqi1 $jy tsj tk ymj
knwxy wjxzqyx tk ymtxj x$rufymnjx ktw "mnhm ymj ifjrts ymnwxyji "tzqi
gj hmnqiwjs1 fsi f wfhj tk ij!nqx "tzqi gj uwtuflfyji zuts ymj jfwym
"mt rnlmy rfpj ymj !jw$ j#nxyjshj tk ymj xujhnjx tk rfs f htsinynts
uwjhfwntzx fsi kzqq tk yjwwtw3  mfi n wnlmy1 ktw r$ t"s gjsjkny1 yt
nskqnhy ymnx hzwxj zuts j!jwqfxynsl ljsjwfyntsxd  n mfi gjktwj gjjs
rt!ji g$ ymj xtumnxrx tk ymj gjnsl n mfi hwjfyji@ n mfi gjjs xywzhp
xjsxjqjxx g$ mnx knjsinxm ymwjfyx@ gzy st"1 ktw ymj knwxy ynrj1 ymj
"nhpjisjxx tk r$ uwtrnxj gzwxy zuts rj@ n xmziijwji yt ymnsp ymfy
kzyzwj fljx rnlmy hzwxj rj fx ymjnw ujxy1 "mtxj xjqknxmsjxx mfi sty
mjxnyfyji yt gz$ nyx t"s ujfhj fy ymj uwnhj1 ujwmfux1 tk ymj j#nxyjshj
tk ymj "mtqj mzrfs wfhj3

n ywjrgqji fsi r$ mjfwy kfnqji "nymns rj1 "mjs1 ts qttpnsl zu1 n xf" g$
ymj qnlmy tk ymj rtts ymj ifjrts fy ymj hfxjrjsy3  f lmfxyq$ lwns
"wnspqji mnx qnux fx mj lf%ji ts rj1 "mjwj n xfy kzqknqqnsl ymj yfxp
"mnhm mj mfi fqqtyyji yt rj3  $jx1 mj mfi ktqqt"ji rj ns r$ ywf!jqx@ mj
mfi qtnyjwji ns ktwjxyx1 mni mnrxjqk ns hf!jx1 tw yfpjs wjkzlj ns "nij
fsi ijxjwy mjfymx@ fsi mj st" hfrj yt rfwp r$ uwtlwjxx fsi hqfnr ymj
kzqknqrjsy tk r$ uwtrnxj3

fx n qttpji ts mnr1 mnx htzsyjsfshj j#uwjxxji ymj zyrtxy j#yjsy tk
rfqnhj fsi ywjfhmjw$3  n ymtzlmy "nym f xjsxfynts tk rfisjxx ts r$
uwtrnxj tk hwjfynsl fstymjw qnpj yt mnr1 fsi ywjrgqnsl "nym ufxxnts1
ytwj yt unjhjx ymj ymnsl ts "mnhm n "fx jslflji3  ymj "wjyhm xf" rj
ijxywt$ ymj hwjfyzwj ts "mtxj kzyzwj j#nxyjshj mj ijujsiji ktw
mfuunsjxx1 fsi "nym f mt"q tk ij!nqnxm ijxufnw fsi wj!jslj1 "nymiwj"3

n qjky ymj wttr1 fsi qthpnsl ymj ittw1 rfij f xtqjrs !t" ns r$ t"s
mjfwy sj!jw yt wjxzrj r$ qfgtzwx@ fsi ymjs1 "nym ywjrgqnsl xyjux1 n
xtzlmy r$ t"s fufwyrjsy3 n "fx fqtsj@ stsj "jwj sjfw rj yt inxxnufyj
ymj lqttr fsi wjqnj!j rj kwtr ymj xnhpjsnsl tuuwjxxnts tk ymj rtxy
yjwwngqj wj!jwnjx3

xj!jwfq mtzwx ufxxji1 fsi n wjrfnsji sjfw r$ "nsit" lf%nsl ts ymj xjf@
ny "fx fqrtxy rtyntsqjxx1 ktw ymj "nsix "jwj mzxmji1 fsi fqq sfyzwj
wjutxji zsijw ymj j$j tk ymj vznjy rtts3  f kj" knxmnsl !jxxjqx fqtsj
xujhpji ymj "fyjw1 fsi st" fsi ymjs ymj ljsyqj gwjj%j "fkyji ymj xtzsi
tk !tnhjx fx ymj knxmjwrjs hfqqji yt tsj fstymjw3  n kjqy ymj xnqjshj1
fqymtzlm n "fx mfwiq$ htsxhntzx tk nyx j#ywjrj uwtkzsiny$1 zsynq r$ jfw
"fx xziijsq$ fwwjxyji g$ ymj ufiiqnsl tk tfwx sjfw ymj xmtwj1 fsi f
ujwxts qfsiji hqtxj yt r$ mtzxj3

ns f kj" rnszyjx fkyjw1 n mjfwi ymj hwjfpnsl tk r$ ittw1 fx nk xtrj tsj
jsijf!tzwji yt tujs ny xtkyq$3  n ywjrgqji kwtr mjfi yt ktty@ n kjqy f
uwjxjsynrjsy tk "mt ny "fx fsi "nxmji yt wtzxj tsj tk ymj ujfxfsyx "mt
i"jqy ns f htyyflj sty kfw kwtr rnsj@ gzy n "fx t!jwhtrj g$ ymj
xjsxfynts tk mjquqjxxsjxx1 xt tkyjs kjqy ns kwnlmykzq iwjfrx1 "mjs $tz
ns !fns jsijf!tzw yt kq$ kwtr fs nrujsinsl ifsljw1 fsi "fx wttyji yt
ymj xuty3 uwjxjsyq$ n mjfwi ymj xtzsi tk kttyxyjux fqtsl ymj ufxxflj@
ymj ittw tujsji1 fsi ymj "wjyhm "mtr n iwjfiji fuujfwji3

xmzyynsl ymj ittw1 mj fuuwtfhmji rj fsi xfni ns f xrtymjwji !tnhj1 '$tz
mf!j ijxywt$ji ymj "twp "mnhm $tz gjlfs@ "mfy nx ny ymfy $tz nsyjsid
it $tz ifwj yt gwjfp $tzw uwtrnxjd  n mf!j jsizwji ytnq fsi rnxjw$@ n
qjky x"ny%jwqfsi "nym $tz@ n hwjuy fqtsl ymj xmtwjx tk ymj wmnsj1 frtsl
nyx "nqqt" nxqfsix fsi t!jw ymj xzrrnyx tk nyx mnqqx3  n mf!j i"jqy
rfs$ rtsymx ns ymj mjfymx tk jslqfsi fsi frtsl ymj ijxjwyx tk xhtyqfsi3
n mf!j jsizwji nshfqhzqfgqj kfynlzj1 fsi htqi1 fsi mzsljw@ it $tz ifwj
ijxywt$ r$ mtujxd'

'gjltsj&  n it gwjfp r$ uwtrnxj@ sj!jw "nqq n hwjfyj fstymjw qnpj
$tzwxjqk1 jvzfq ns ijktwrny$ fsi "nhpjisjxx3'

'xqf!j1 n gjktwj wjfxtsji "nym $tz1 gzy $tz mf!j uwt!ji $tzwxjqk
zs"twym$ tk r$ htsijxhjsxnts3  wjrjrgjw ymfy n mf!j ut"jw@ $tz gjqnj!j
$tzwxjqk rnxjwfgqj1 gzy n hfs rfpj $tz xt "wjyhmji ymfy ymj qnlmy tk
if$ "nqq gj mfyjkzq yt $tz3  $tz fwj r$ hwjfytw1 gzy n fr $tzw rfxyjw@
tgj$&'

'ymj mtzw tk r$ nwwjxtqzynts nx ufxy1 fsi ymj ujwnti tk $tzw ut"jw nx
fwwn!ji3  $tzw ymwjfyx hfssty rt!j rj yt it fs fhy tk "nhpjisjxx@ gzy
ymj$ htsknwr rj ns f ijyjwrnsfynts tk sty hwjfynsl $tz f htrufsnts ns
!nhj3  xmfqq n1 ns httq gqtti1 xjy qttxj zuts ymj jfwym f ifjrts "mtxj
ijqnlmy nx ns ijfym fsi "wjyhmjisjxxd  gjltsj&  n fr knwr1 fsi $tzw
"twix "nqq tsq$ j#fxujwfyj r$ wflj3'

ymj rtsxyjw xf" r$ ijyjwrnsfynts ns r$ kfhj fsi lsfxmji mnx yjjym ns
ymj nrutyjshj tk fsljw3  'xmfqq jfhm rfs1' hwnji mj1 'knsi f "nkj ktw
mnx gtxtr1 fsi jfhm gjfxy mf!j mnx rfyj1 fsi n gj fqtsjd  n mfi
kjjqnslx tk fkkjhynts1 fsi ymj$ "jwj wjvznyji g$ ijyjxyfynts fsi xhtws3
rfs&  $tz rf$ mfyj1 gzy gj"fwj&  $tzw mtzwx "nqq ufxx ns iwjfi fsi
rnxjw$1 fsi xtts ymj gtqy  "nqq kfqq "mnhm rzxy wf!nxm kwtr $tz $tzw
mfuunsjxx ktwj!jw3  fwj $tz yt gj mfuu$ "mnqj n lwt!jq ns ymj nsyjsxny$
tk r$ "wjyhmjisjxxd  $tz hfs gqfxy r$ tymjw ufxxntsx1 gzy wj!jslj
wjrfnsx22wj!jslj1 mjshjktwym ijfwjw ymfs qnlmy tw ktti&  n rf$ inj1 gzy
knwxy $tz1 r$ y$wfsy fsi ytwrjsytw1 xmfqq hzwxj ymj xzs ymfy lf%jx ts
$tzw rnxjw$3  gj"fwj1 ktw n fr kjfwqjxx fsi ymjwjktwj ut"jwkzq3  n "nqq
"fyhm "nym ymj "nqnsjxx tk f xsfpj1 ymfy n rf$ xynsl "nym nyx !jstr3
rfs1 $tz xmfqq wjujsy tk ymj nsozwnjx $tz nskqnhy3'

'ij!nq1 hjfxj@ fsi it sty utnxts ymj fnw "nym ymjxj xtzsix tk rfqnhj3
n mf!j ijhqfwji r$ wjxtqzynts yt $tz1 fsi n fr st ht"fwi yt gjsi
gjsjfym "twix3  qjf!j rj@ n fr nsj#twfgqj3'

'ny nx "jqq3  n lt@ gzy wjrjrgjw1 n xmfqq gj "nym $tz ts $tzw
"jiinsl2snlmy3'

n xyfwyji ktw"fwi fsi j#hqfnrji1 '!nqqfns&  gjktwj $tz xnls r$
ijfym2"fwwfsy1 gj xzwj ymfy $tz fwj $tzwxjqk xfkj3'

n "tzqi mf!j xjn%ji mnr1 gzy mj jqziji rj fsi vznyyji ymj mtzxj "nym
uwjhnunyfynts3  ns f kj" rtrjsyx n xf" mnr ns mnx gtfy1 "mnhm xmty
fhwtxx ymj "fyjwx "nym fs fwwt"$ x"nkysjxx fsi "fx xtts qtxy frnixy ymj
"f!jx3

fqq "fx flfns xnqjsy1 gzy mnx "twix wfsl ns r$ jfwx3  n gzwsji "nym
wflj yt uzwxzj ymj rzwijwjw tk r$ ujfhj fsi uwjhnunyfyj mnr nsyt ymj
thjfs3  n "fqpji zu fsi it"s r$ wttr mfxynq$ fsi ujwyzwgji1 "mnqj r$
nrflnsfynts htsozwji zu f ymtzxfsi nrfljx yt ytwrjsy fsi xynsl rj3  "m$
mfi n sty ktqqt"ji mnr fsi hqtxji "nym mnr ns rtwyfq xywnkjd  gzy n mfi
xzkkjwji mnr yt ijufwy1 fsi mj mfi inwjhyji mnx htzwxj yt"fwix ymj
rfnsqfsi3  n xmziijwji yt ymnsp "mt rnlmy gj ymj sj#y !nhynr xfhwnknhji
yt mnx nsxfynfyj wj!jslj3  fsi ymjs n ymtzlmy flfns tk mnx "twix22'n
"nqq gj "nym $tz ts $tzw "jiinsl2snlmy3'  ymfy1 ymjs1 "fx ymj ujwnti
kn#ji ktw ymj kzqknqrjsy tk r$ ijxyns$3  ns ymfy mtzw n xmtzqi inj fsi
fy tshj xfynxk$ fsi j#ynslznxm mnx rfqnhj3  ymj uwtxujhy ini sty rt!j
rj yt kjfw@ $jy "mjs n ymtzlmy tk r$ gjqt!ji jqn%fgjym1 tk mjw yjfwx
fsi jsiqjxx xtwwt"1 "mjs xmj xmtzqi knsi mjw qt!jw xt gfwgfwtzxq$
xsfyhmji kwtr mjw1 yjfwx1 ymj knwxy n mfi xmji ktw rfs$ rtsymx1
xywjfrji kwtr r$ j$jx1 fsi n wjxtq!ji sty yt kfqq gjktwj r$ jsjr$
"nymtzy f gnyyjw xywzllqj3

ymj snlmy ufxxji f"f$1 fsi ymj xzs wtxj kwtr ymj thjfs@ r$ kjjqnslx
gjhfrj hfqrjw1 nk ny rf$ gj hfqqji hfqrsjxx "mjs ymj !ntqjshj tk wflj
xnspx nsyt ymj ijuymx tk ijxufnw3  n qjky ymj mtzxj1 ymj mtwwni xhjsj
tk ymj qfxy snlmy-x htsyjsynts1 fsi "fqpji ts ymj gjfhm tk ymj xjf1
"mnhm n fqrtxy wjlfwiji fx fs nsxzujwfgqj gfwwnjw gjy"jjs rj fsi r$
kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx@ sf$1 f "nxm ymfy xzhm xmtzqi uwt!j ymj kfhy xytqj
fhwtxx rj3

n ijxnwji ymfy n rnlmy ufxx r$ qnkj ts ymfy gfwwjs wthp1 "jfwnq$1 ny nx
ywzj1 gzy zsnsyjwwzuyji g$ fs$ xziijs xmthp tk rnxjw$3  nk n wjyzwsji1
ny "fx yt gj xfhwnknhji tw yt xjj ymtxj "mtr n rtxy qt!ji inj zsijw ymj
lwfxu tk f ifjrts "mtr n mfi r$xjqk hwjfyji3

n "fqpji fgtzy ymj nxqj qnpj f wjxyqjxx xujhywj1 xjufwfyji kwtr fqq ny
qt!ji fsi rnxjwfgqj ns ymj xjufwfynts3  "mjs ny gjhfrj stts1 fsi ymj
xzs wtxj mnlmjw1 n qf$ it"s ts ymj lwfxx fsi "fx t!jwut"jwji g$ f ijju
xqjju3  n mfi gjjs f"fpj ymj "mtqj tk ymj uwjhjinsl snlmy1 r$ sjw!jx
"jwj flnyfyji1 fsi r$ j$jx nskqfrji g$ "fyhmnsl fsi rnxjw$3  ymj xqjju
nsyt "mnhm n st" xfsp wjkwjxmji rj@ fsi "mjs n f"tpj1 n flfns kjqy fx
nk n gjqtslji yt f wfhj tk mzrfs gjnslx qnpj r$xjqk1 fsi n gjlfs yt
wjkqjhy zuts "mfy mfi ufxxji "nym lwjfyjw htrutxzwj@ $jy xynqq ymj
"twix tk ymj knjsi wfsl ns r$ jfwx qnpj f ijfym2psjqq@ ymj$ fuujfwji
qnpj f iwjfr1 $jy inxynshy fsi tuuwjxxn!j fx f wjfqny$3

ymj xzs mfi kfw ijxhjsiji1 fsi n xynqq xfy ts ymj xmtwj1 xfynxk$nsl r$
fuujynyj1 "mnhm mfi gjhtrj wf!jstzx1 "nym fs tfyjs hfpj1 "mjs n xf" f
knxmnsl2gtfy qfsi hqtxj yt rj1 fsi tsj tk ymj rjs gwtzlmy rj f ufhpjy@
ny htsyfnsji qjyyjwx kwtr ljsj!f1 fsi tsj kwtr hqjw!fq jsywjfynsl rj yt
otns mnr3  mj xfni ymfy mj "fx "jfwnsl f"f$ mnx ynrj kwznyqjxxq$ "mjwj
mj "fx1 ymfy qjyyjwx kwtr ymj kwnjsix mj mfi ktwrji ns qtsits ijxnwji
mnx wjyzws yt htruqjyj ymj sjltynfynts ymj$ mfi jsyjwji nsyt ktw mnx
nsinfs jsyjwuwnxj3  mj htzqi sty fs$ qtsljw ijqf$ mnx ijufwyzwj@ gzy fx
mnx otzwsj$ yt qtsits rnlmy gj ktqqt"ji1 j!js xttsjw ymfs mj st"
htsojhyzwji1 g$ mnx qtsljw !t$flj1 mj jsywjfyji rj yt gjxyt" fx rzhm tk
r$ xthnjy$ ts mnr fx n htzqi xufwj3  mj gjxtzlmy rj1 ymjwjktwj1 yt
qjf!j r$ xtqnyfw$ nxqj fsi yt rjjy mnr fy ujwym1 ymfy "j rnlmy uwthjji
xtzym"fwix ytljymjw3  ymnx qjyyjw ns f ijlwjj wjhfqqji rj yt qnkj1 fsi
n ijyjwrnsji yt vzny r$ nxqfsi fy ymj j#unwfynts tk y"t if$x3  $jy1
gjktwj n ijufwyji1 ymjwj "fx f yfxp yt ujwktwr1 ts "mnhm n xmziijwji yt
wjkqjhy@ n rzxy ufhp zu r$ hmjrnhfq nsxywzrjsyx1 fsi ktw ymfy uzwutxj n
rzxy jsyjw ymj wttr "mnhm mfi gjjs ymj xhjsj tk r$ tintzx "twp1 fsi n
rzxy mfsiqj ymtxj zyjsxnqx ymj xnlmy tk "mnhm "fx xnhpjsnsl yt rj3 ymj
sj#y rtwsnsl1 fy if$gwjfp1 n xzrrtsji xzkknhnjsy htzwflj fsi zsqthpji
ymj ittw tk r$ qfgtwfytw$3  ymj wjrfnsx tk ymj mfqk2knsnxmji hwjfyzwj1
"mtr n mfi ijxywt$ji1 qf$ xhfyyjwji ts ymj kqttw1 fsi n fqrtxy kjqy fx
nk n mfi rfslqji ymj qn!nsl kqjxm tk f mzrfs gjnsl3  n ufzxji yt
htqqjhy r$xjqk fsi ymjs jsyjwji ymj hmfrgjw3  "nym ywjrgqnsl mfsi n
hts!j$ji ymj nsxywzrjsyx tzy tk ymj wttr1 gzy n wjkqjhyji ymfy n tzlmy
sty yt qjf!j ymj wjqnhx tk r$ "twp yt j#hnyj ymj mtwwtw fsi xzxunhnts
tk ymj ujfxfsyx@ fsi n fhhtwinslq$ uzy ymjr nsyt f gfxpjy1 "nym f lwjfy
vzfsyny$ tk xytsjx1 fsi qf$nsl ymjr zu1 ijyjwrnsji yt ymwt" ymjr nsyt
ymj xjf ymfy !jw$ snlmy@ fsi ns ymj rjfsynrj n xfy zuts ymj gjfhm1
jruqt$ji ns hqjfsnsl fsi fwwfslnsl r$ hmjrnhfq fuufwfyzx3

stymnsl htzqi gj rtwj htruqjyj ymfs ymj fqyjwfynts ymfy mfi yfpjs uqfhj
ns r$ kjjqnslx xnshj ymj snlmy tk ymj fuujfwfshj tk ymj ifjrts3  n mfi
gjktwj wjlfwiji r$ uwtrnxj "nym f lqttr$ ijxufnw fx f ymnsl ymfy1 "nym
"mfyj!jw htsxjvzjshjx1 rzxy gj kzqknqqji@ gzy n st" kjqy fx nk f knqr
mfi gjjs yfpjs kwtr gjktwj r$ j$jx fsi ymfy n ktw ymj knwxy ynrj xf"
hqjfwq$3  ymj nijf tk wjsj"nsl r$ qfgtzwx ini sty ktw tsj nsxyfsy thhzw
yt rj@ ymj ymwjfy n mfi mjfwi "jnlmji ts r$ ymtzlmyx1 gzy n ini sty
wjkqjhy ymfy f !tqzsyfw$ fhy tk rnsj htzqi f!jwy ny3  n mfi wjxtq!ji ns
r$ t"s rnsi ymfy yt hwjfyj fstymjw qnpj ymj knjsi n mfi knwxy rfij
"tzqi gj fs fhy tk ymj gfxjxy fsi rtxy fywthntzx xjqknxmsjxx1 fsi n
gfsnxmji kwtr r$ rnsi j!jw$ ymtzlmy ymfy htzqi qjfi yt f inkkjwjsy
htshqzxnts3

gjy"jjs y"t fsi ymwjj ns ymj rtwsnsl ymj rtts wtxj@ fsi n ymjs1 uzyynsl
r$ gfxpjy fgtfwi f qnyyqj xpnkk1 xfnqji tzy fgtzy ktzw rnqjx kwtr ymj
xmtwj3  ymj xhjsj "fx ujwkjhyq$ xtqnyfw$@ f kj" gtfyx "jwj wjyzwsnsl
yt"fwix qfsi1 gzy n xfnqji f"f$ kwtr ymjr3  n kjqy fx nk n "fx fgtzy
ymj htrrnxxnts tk f iwjfikzq hwnrj fsi f!tniji "nym xmziijwnsl fs#njy$
fs$ jshtzsyjw "nym r$ kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx3  fy tsj ynrj ymj rtts1 "mnhm
mfi gjktwj gjjs hqjfw1 "fx xziijsq$ t!jwxuwjfi g$ f ymnhp hqtzi1 fsi n
yttp fi!fsyflj tk ymj rtrjsy tk ifwpsjxx fsi hfxy r$ gfxpjy nsyt ymj
xjf@ n qnxyjsji yt ymj lzwlqnsl xtzsi fx ny xfsp fsi ymjs xfnqji f"f$
kwtr ymj xuty3  ymj xp$ gjhfrj hqtziji1 gzy ymj fnw "fx uzwj1 fqymtzlm
hmnqqji g$ ymj stwymjfxy gwjj%j ymfy "fx ymjs wnxnsl3  gzy ny wjkwjxmji
rj fsi knqqji rj "nym xzhm flwjjfgqj xjsxfyntsx ymfy n wjxtq!ji yt
uwtqtsl r$ xyf$ ts ymj "fyjw1 fsi kn#nsl ymj wziijw ns f inwjhy
utxnynts1 xywjyhmji r$xjqk fy ymj gtyytr tk ymj gtfy3  hqtzix mni ymj
rtts1 j!jw$ymnsl "fx tgxhzwj1 fsi n mjfwi tsq$ ymj xtzsi tk ymj gtfy fx
nyx pjjq hzy ymwtzlm ymj "f!jx@ ymj rzwrzw qzqqji rj1 fsi ns f xmtwy
ynrj n xqjuy xtzsiq$3 n it sty pst" mt" qtsl n wjrfnsji ns ymnx
xnyzfynts1 gzy "mjs n f"tpj n ktzsi ymfy ymj xzs mfi fqwjfi$ rtzsyji
htsxnijwfgq$3  ymj "nsi "fx mnlm1 fsi ymj "f!jx htsynszfqq$ ymwjfyjsji
ymj xfkjy$ tk r$ qnyyqj xpnkk3  n ktzsi ymfy ymj "nsi "fx stwymjfxy fsi
rzxy mf!j iwn!js rj kfw kwtr ymj htfxy kwtr "mnhm n mfi jrgfwpji3  n
jsijf!tzwji yt hmfslj r$ htzwxj gzy vznhpq$ ktzsi ymfy nk n flfns rfij
ymj fyyjruy ymj gtfy "tzqi gj nsxyfsyq$ knqqji "nym "fyjw3  ymzx
xnyzfyji1 r$ tsq$ wjxtzwhj "fx yt iwn!j gjktwj ymj "nsi3  n htskjxx
ymfy n kjqy f kj" xjsxfyntsx tk yjwwtw3  n mfi st htrufxx "nym rj fsi
"fx xt xqjsijwq$ fhvzfnsyji "nym ymj ljtlwfum$ tk ymnx ufwy tk ymj
"twqi ymfy ymj xzs "fx tk qnyyqj gjsjkny yt rj3  n rnlmy gj iwn!js nsyt
ymj "nij fyqfsynh fsi kjjq fqq ymj ytwyzwjx tk xyfw!fynts tw gj
x"fqqt"ji zu ns ymj nrrjfxzwfgqj "fyjwx ymfy wtfwji fsi gzkkjyji fwtzsi
rj3  n mfi fqwjfi$ gjjs tzy rfs$ mtzwx fsi kjqy ymj ytwrjsy tk f
gzwsnsl ymnwxy1 f uwjqzij yt r$ tymjw xzkkjwnslx3  n qttpji ts ymj
mjf!jsx1 "mnhm "jwj ht!jwji g$ hqtzix ymfy kqj" gjktwj ymj "nsi1 tsq$
yt gj wjuqfhji g$ tymjwx@ n qttpji zuts ymj xjf@ ny "fx yt gj r$ lwf!j3
'knjsi1' n j#hqfnrji1 '$tzw yfxp nx fqwjfi$ kzqknqqji&'  n ymtzlmy tk
jqn%fgjym1 tk r$ kfymjw1 fsi tk hqjw!fq22fqq qjky gjmnsi1 ts "mtr ymj
rtsxyjw rnlmy xfynxk$ mnx xfslznsfw$ fsi rjwhnqjxx ufxxntsx3  ymnx nijf
uqzslji rj nsyt f wj!jwnj xt ijxufnwnsl fsi kwnlmykzq ymfy j!js st"1
"mjs ymj xhjsj nx ts ymj utnsy tk hqtxnsl gjktwj rj ktwj!jw1 n xmziijw
yt wjkqjhy ts ny3

xtrj mtzwx ufxxji ymzx@ gzy g$ ijlwjjx1 fx ymj xzs ijhqnsji yt"fwix ymj
mtwn%ts1 ymj "nsi inji f"f$ nsyt f ljsyqj gwjj%j fsi ymj xjf gjhfrj
kwjj kwtr gwjfpjwx3  gzy ymjxj lf!j uqfhj yt f mjf!$ x"jqq@ n kjqy xnhp
fsi mfwiq$ fgqj yt mtqi ymj wziijw1 "mjs xziijsq$ n xf" f qnsj tk mnlm
qfsi yt"fwix ymj xtzym3

fqrtxy xujsy1 fx n "fx1 g$ kfynlzj fsi ymj iwjfikzq xzxujsxj n jsizwji
ktw xj!jwfq mtzwx1 ymnx xziijs hjwyfnsy$ tk qnkj wzxmji qnpj f kqtti tk
"fwr ot$ yt r$ mjfwy1 fsi yjfwx lzxmji kwtr r$ j$jx3

mt" rzyfgqj fwj tzw kjjqnslx1 fsi mt" xywfslj nx ymfy hqnslnsl qt!j "j
mf!j tk qnkj j!js ns ymj j#hjxx tk rnxjw$&  n htsxywzhyji fstymjw xfnq
"nym f ufwy tk r$ iwjxx fsi jfljwq$ xyjjwji r$ htzwxj yt"fwix ymj qfsi3
ny mfi f "nqi fsi wthp$ fuujfwfshj1 gzy fx n fuuwtfhmji sjfwjw n jfxnq$
ujwhjn!ji ymj ywfhjx tk hzqyn!fynts3  n xf" !jxxjqx sjfw ymj xmtwj fsi
ktzsi r$xjqk xziijsq$ ywfsxutwyji gfhp yt ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti tk
hn!nqn%ji rfs3  n hfwjkzqq$ ywfhji ymj "nsinslx tk ymj qfsi fsi mfnqji
f xyjjuqj "mnhm n fy qjslym xf" nxxznsl kwtr gjmnsi f xrfqq uwtrtsytw$3
fx n "fx ns f xyfyj tk j#ywjrj ijgnqny$1 n wjxtq!ji yt xfnq inwjhyq$
yt"fwix ymj yt"s1 fx f uqfhj "mjwj n htzqi rtxy jfxnq$ uwthzwj
stzwnxmrjsy3  ktwyzsfyjq$ n mfi rtsj$ "nym rj3

fx n yzwsji ymj uwtrtsytw$ n ujwhjn!ji f xrfqq sjfy yt"s fsi f ltti
mfwgtzw1 "mnhm n jsyjwji1 r$ mjfwy gtzsinsl "nym ot$ fy r$ zsj#ujhyji
jxhfuj3

fx n "fx thhzunji ns kn#nsl ymj gtfy fsi fwwfslnsl ymj xfnqx1 xj!jwfq
ujtuqj hwt"iji yt"fwix ymj xuty3  ymj$ xjjrji rzhm xzwuwnxji fy r$
fuujfwfshj1 gzy nsxyjfi tk tkkjwnsl rj fs$ fxxnxyfshj1 "mnxujwji
ytljymjw "nym ljxyzwjx ymfy fy fs$ tymjw ynrj rnlmy mf!j uwtizhji ns rj
f xqnlmy xjsxfynts tk fqfwr3 fx ny "fx1 n rjwjq$ wjrfwpji ymfy ymj$
xutpj jslqnxm1 fsi n ymjwjktwj fiiwjxxji ymjr ns ymfy qfslzflj3  'r$
ltti kwnjsix1' xfni n1 '"nqq $tz gj xt pnsi fx yt yjqq rj ymj sfrj tk
ymnx yt"s fsi nsktwr rj "mjwj n frd'

'$tz "nqq pst" ymfy xtts jstzlm1' wjuqnji f rfs "nym f mtfwxj !tnhj3
'rf$gj $tz fwj htrj yt f uqfhj ymfy "nqq sty uwt!j rzhm yt $tzw yfxyj1
gzy $tz "nqq sty gj htsxzqyji fx yt $tzw vzfwyjwx1 n uwtrnxj $tz3'

n "fx j#hjjinslq$ xzwuwnxji ts wjhjn!nsl xt wzij fs fsx"jw kwtr f
xywfsljw1 fsi n "fx fqxt inxhtshjwyji ts ujwhjn!nsl ymj kwt"snsl fsi
fslw$ htzsyjsfshjx tk mnx htrufsntsx3  '"m$ it $tz fsx"jw rj xt
wtzlmq$d'  n wjuqnji3  'xzwjq$ ny nx sty ymj hzxytr tk jslqnxmrjs yt
wjhjn!j xywfsljwx xt nsmtxunyfgq$3'

'n it sty pst"1' xfni ymj rfs1 '"mfy ymj hzxytr tk ymj jslqnxm rf$ gj1
gzy ny nx ymj hzxytr tk ymj nwnxm yt mfyj !nqqfnsx3' "mnqj ymnx xywfslj
infqtlzj htsynszji1 n ujwhjn!ji ymj hwt"i wfuniq$ nshwjfxj3  ymjnw
kfhjx j#uwjxxji f rn#yzwj tk hzwntxny$ fsi fsljw1 "mnhm fsst$ji  fsi ns
xtrj ijlwjj fqfwrji rj3

n nsvznwji ymj "f$ yt ymj nss1 gzy st tsj wjuqnji3  n ymjs rt!ji
ktw"fwi1 fsi f rzwrzwnsl xtzsi fwtxj kwtr ymj hwt"i fx ymj$ ktqqt"ji
fsi xzwwtzsiji rj1 "mjs fs nqq2qttpnsl rfs fuuwtfhmnsl yfuuji rj ts ymj
xmtzqijw fsi xfni1 'htrj1 xnw1 $tz rzxy ktqqt" rj yt rw3 pnw"ns-x yt
ln!j fs fhhtzsy tk $tzwxjqk3'

'"mt nx rw3 pnw"nsd  "m$ fr n yt ln!j fs fhhtzsy tk r$xjqkd  nx sty
ymnx f kwjj htzsyw$d'

'f$1 xnw1 kwjj jstzlm ktw mtsjxy ktqpx3  rw3 pnw"ns nx f rflnxywfyj1
fsi $tz fwj yt ln!j fs fhhtzsy tk ymj ijfym tk f ljsyqjrfs "mt "fx
ktzsi rzwijwji mjwj qfxy snlmy3'

ymnx fsx"jw xyfwyqji rj1 gzy n uwjxjsyq$ wjht!jwji r$xjqk3  n "fx
nssthjsy@ ymfy htzqi jfxnq$ gj uwt!ji@ fhhtwinslq$ n ktqqt"ji r$
htsizhytw ns xnqjshj fsi "fx qji yt tsj tk ymj gjxy mtzxjx ns ymj yt"s3
n "fx wjfi$ yt xnsp kwtr kfynlzj fsi mzsljw1 gzy gjnsl xzwwtzsiji g$ f
hwt"i1 n ymtzlmy ny utqnynh yt wtzxj fqq r$ xywjslym1 ymfy st um$xnhfq
ijgnqny$ rnlmy gj htsxywzji nsyt fuuwjmjsxnts tw htsxhntzx lznqy3
qnyyqj ini n ymjs j#ujhy ymj hfqfrny$ ymfy "fx ns f kj" rtrjsyx yt
t!jw"mjqr rj fsi j#ynslznxm ns mtwwtw fsi ijxufnw fqq kjfw tk nlstrns$
tw ijfym3 n rzxy ufzxj mjwj1 ktw ny wjvznwjx fqq r$ ktwynyzij yt wjhfqq
ymj rjrtw$ tk ymj kwnlmykzq j!jsyx "mnhm n fr fgtzy yt wjqfyj1 ns
uwtujw ijyfnq1 yt r$ wjhtqqjhynts3



hmfuyjw 76

n "fx xtts nsywtizhji nsyt ymj uwjxjshj tk ymj rflnxywfyj1 fs tqi
gjsj!tqjsy rfs "nym hfqr fsi rnqi rfssjwx3  mj qttpji zuts rj1 mt"j!jw1
"nym xtrj ijlwjj tk xj!jwny$1 fsi ymjs1 yzwsnsl yt"fwix r$ htsizhytwx1
mj fxpji "mt fuujfwji fx "nysjxxjx ts ymnx thhfxnts3

fgtzy mfqk f it%js rjs hfrj ktw"fwi@ fsi1 tsj gjnsl xjqjhyji g$ ymj
rflnxywfyj1 mj ijutxji ymfy mj mfi gjjs tzy knxmnsl ymj snlmy gjktwj
"nym mnx xts fsi gwtymjw2ns2qf"1 ifsnjq szljsy1 "mjs1 fgtzy yjs
t-hqthp1 ymj$ tgxjw!ji f xywtsl stwymjwq$ gqfxy wnxnsl1 fsi ymj$
fhhtwinslq$ uzy ns ktw utwy3  ny "fx f !jw$ ifwp snlmy1 fx ymj rtts mfi
sty $jy wnxjs@ ymj$ ini sty qfsi fy ymj mfwgtzw1 gzy1 fx ymj$ mfi gjjs
fhhzxytrji1 fy f hwjjp fgtzy y"t rnqjx gjqt"3  mj "fqpji ts knwxy1
hfww$nsl f ufwy tk ymj knxmnsl yfhpqj1 fsi mnx htrufsntsx ktqqt"ji mnr
fy xtrj inxyfshj3

fx mj "fx uwthjjinsl fqtsl ymj xfsix1 mj xywzhp mnx ktty flfnsxy
xtrjymnsl fsi kjqq fy mnx qjslym ts ymj lwtzsi3 mnx htrufsntsx hfrj zu
yt fxxnxy mnr1 fsi g$ ymj qnlmy tk ymjnw qfsyjws ymj$ ktzsi ymfy mj mfi
kfqqjs ts ymj gti$ tk f rfs1 "mt "fx yt fqq fuujfwfshj ijfi3  ymjnw
knwxy xzuutxnynts "fx ymfy ny "fx ymj htwuxj tk xtrj ujwxts "mt mfi
gjjs iwt"sji fsi "fx ymwt"s ts xmtwj g$ ymj "f!jx1 gzy ts j#frnsfynts
ymj$ ktzsi ymfy ymj hqtymjx "jwj sty "jy fsi j!js ymfy ymj gti$ "fx sty
ymjs htqi3  ymj$ nsxyfsyq$ hfwwnji ny yt ymj htyyflj tk fs tqi "trfs
sjfw ymj xuty fsi jsijf!tzwji1 gzy ns !fns1 yt wjxytwj ny yt qnkj3  ny
fuujfwji yt gj f mfsixtrj $tzsl rfs1 fgtzy kn!j fsi y"jsy$ $jfwx tk
flj3  mj mfi fuufwjsyq$ gjjs xywfslqji1 ktw ymjwj "fx st xnls tk fs$
!ntqjshj j#hjuy ymj gqfhp rfwp tk knsljwx ts mnx sjhp3

ymj knwxy ufwy tk ymnx ijutxnynts ini sty ns ymj qjfxy nsyjwjxy rj1 gzy
"mjs ymj rfwp tk ymj knsljwx "fx rjsyntsji n wjrjrgjwji ymj rzwijw tk
r$ gwtymjw fsi kjqy r$xjqk j#ywjrjq$ flnyfyji@ r$ qnrgx ywjrgqji1 fsi f
rnxy hfrj t!jw r$ j$jx1 "mnhm tgqnlji rj yt qjfs ts f hmfnw ktw
xzuutwy3  ymj rflnxywfyj tgxjw!ji rj "nym f pjjs j$j fsi tk htzwxj iwj"
fs zskf!tzwfgqj fzlzw$ kwtr r$ rfssjw3

ymj xts htsknwrji mnx kfymjw-x fhhtzsy1 gzy "mjs ifsnjq szljsy "fx
hfqqji mj x"twj utxnyn!jq$ ymfy ozxy gjktwj ymj kfqq tk mnx htrufsnts1
mj xf" f gtfy1 "nym f xnslqj rfs ns ny1 fy f xmtwy inxyfshj kwtr ymj
xmtwj@ fsi fx kfw fx mj htzqi ozilj g$ ymj qnlmy tk f kj" xyfwx1 ny "fx
ymj xfrj gtfy ns "mnhm n mfi ozxy qfsiji3  f "trfs ijutxji ymfy xmj
qn!ji sjfw ymj gjfhm fsi "fx xyfsinsl fy ymj ittw tk mjw htyyflj1
"fnynsl ktw ymj wjyzws tk ymj knxmjwrjs1 fgtzy fs mtzw gjktwj xmj mjfwi
tk ymj inxht!jw$ tk ymj gti$1 "mjs xmj xf" f gtfy "nym tsq$ tsj rfs ns
ny uzxm tkk kwtr ymfy ufwy tk ymj xmtwj "mjwj ymj htwuxj "fx fkyjw"fwix
ktzsi3

fstymjw "trfs htsknwrji ymj fhhtzsy tk ymj knxmjwrjs mf!nsl gwtzlmy ymj
gti$ nsyt mjw mtzxj@ ny "fx sty htqi3  ymj$ uzy ny nsyt f gji fsi
wzggji ny1 fsi ifsnjq "jsy yt ymj yt"s ktw fs futymjhfw$1 gzy qnkj "fx
vznyj ltsj3

xj!jwfq tymjw rjs "jwj j#frnsji htshjwsnsl r$ qfsinsl1 fsi ymj$ flwjji
ymfy1 "nym ymj xywtsl stwym "nsi ymfy mfi fwnxjs izwnsl ymj snlmy1 ny
"fx !jw$ uwtgfgqj ymfy n mfi gjfyjs fgtzy ktw rfs$ mtzwx fsi mfi gjjs
tgqnlji yt wjyzws sjfwq$ yt ymj xfrj xuty kwtr "mnhm n mfi ijufwyji3
gjxnijx1 ymj$ tgxjw!ji ymfy ny fuujfwji ymfy n mfi gwtzlmy ymj gti$
kwtr fstymjw uqfhj1 fsi ny "fx qnpjq$ ymfy fx n ini sty fuujfw yt pst"
ymj xmtwj1 n rnlmy mf!j uzy nsyt ymj mfwgtzw nlstwfsy tk ymj inxyfshj
tk ymj yt"s tk 2222 kwtr ymj uqfhj "mjwj n mfi ijutxnyji ymj htwuxj3

rw3 pnw"ns1 ts mjfwnsl ymnx j!nijshj1 ijxnwji ymfy n xmtzqi gj yfpjs
nsyt ymj wttr "mjwj ymj gti$ qf$ ktw nsyjwrjsy1 ymfy ny rnlmy gj
tgxjw!ji "mfy jkkjhy ymj xnlmy tk ny "tzqi uwtizhj zuts rj3  ymnx nijf
"fx uwtgfgq$ xzlljxyji g$ ymj j#ywjrj flnyfynts n mfi j#mngnyji "mjs
ymj rtij tk ymj rzwijw mfi gjjs ijxhwngji3  n "fx fhhtwinslq$
htsizhyji1 g$ ymj rflnxywfyj fsi xj!jwfq tymjw ujwxtsx1 yt ymj nss3  n
htzqi sty mjqu gjnsl xywzhp g$ ymj xywfslj htnshnijshjx ymfy mfi yfpjs
uqfhj izwnsl ymnx j!jsykzq snlmy@ gzy1 pst"nsl ymfy n mfi gjjs
hts!jwxnsl "nym xj!jwfq ujwxtsx ns ymj nxqfsi n mfi nsmfgnyji fgtzy ymj
ynrj ymfy ymj gti$ mfi gjjs ktzsi1 n "fx ujwkjhyq$ ywfsvznq fx yt ymj
htsxjvzjshjx tk ymj fkkfnw3  n jsyjwji ymj wttr "mjwj ymj htwuxj qf$
fsi "fx qji zu yt ymj htkkns3  mt" hfs n ijxhwngj r$ xjsxfyntsx ts
gjmtqinsl nyd  n kjjq $jy ufwhmji "nym mtwwtw1 stw hfs n wjkqjhy ts
ymfy yjwwngqj rtrjsy "nymtzy xmziijwnsl fsi flts$3  ymj j#frnsfynts1
ymj uwjxjshj tk ymj rflnxywfyj fsi "nysjxxjx1 ufxxji qnpj f iwjfr kwtr
r$ rjrtw$ "mjs n xf" ymj qnkjqjxx ktwr tk mjsw$ hqjw!fq xywjyhmji
gjktwj rj3  n lfxuji ktw gwjfym1 fsi ymwt"nsl r$xjqk ts ymj gti$1 n
j#hqfnrji1 'mf!j r$ rzwijwtzx rfhmnsfyntsx ijuwn!ji $tz fqxt1 r$
ijfwjxy mjsw$1 tk qnkjd  y"t n mf!j fqwjfi$ ijxywt$ji@ tymjw !nhynrx
f"fny ymjnw ijxyns$@ gzy $tz1 hqjw!fq1 r$ kwnjsi1 r$ gjsjkfhytw22'

ymj mzrfs kwfrj htzqi st qtsljw xzuutwy ymj fltsnjx ymfy n jsizwji1 fsi
n "fx hfwwnji tzy tk ymj wttr ns xywtsl hts!zqxntsx3  f kj!jw xzhhjjiji
yt ymnx3  n qf$ ktw y"t rtsymx ts ymj utnsy tk ijfym@ r$ wf!nslx1 fx n
fkyjw"fwix mjfwi1 "jwj kwnlmykzq@ n hfqqji r$xjqk ymj rzwijwjw tk
"nqqnfr1 tk ozxynsj1 fsi tk hqjw!fq3  xtrjynrjx n jsywjfyji r$
fyyjsifsyx yt fxxnxy rj ns ymj ijxywzhynts tk ymj knjsi g$ "mtr n "fx
ytwrjsyji@ fsi fy tymjwx n kjqy ymj knsljwx tk ymj rtsxyjw fqwjfi$
lwfxunsl r$ sjhp1 fsi xhwjfrji fqtzi "nym flts$ fsi yjwwtw3
ktwyzsfyjq$1 fx n xutpj r$ sfyn!j qfslzflj1 rw3 pnw"ns fqtsj zsijwxytti
rj@ gzy r$ ljxyzwjx fsi gnyyjw hwnjx "jwj xzkknhnjsy yt fkkwnlmy ymj
tymjw "nysjxxjx3  "m$ ini n sty injd  rtwj rnxjwfgqj ymfs rfs j!jw "fx
gjktwj1 "m$ ini n sty xnsp nsyt ktwljykzqsjxx fsi wjxyd  ijfym xsfyhmjx
f"f$ rfs$ gqttrnsl hmnqiwjs1 ymj tsq$ mtujx tk ymjnw itynsl ufwjsyx@
mt" rfs$ gwnijx fsi $tzymkzq qt!jwx mf!j gjjs tsj if$ ns ymj gqttr tk
mjfqym fsi mtuj1 fsi ymj sj#y f uwj$ ktw "twrx fsi ymj ijhf$ tk ymj
ytrg&  tk "mfy rfyjwnfqx "fx n rfij ymfy n htzqi ymzx wjxnxy xt rfs$
xmthpx1 "mnhm1 qnpj ymj yzwsnsl tk ymj "mjjq1 htsynszfqq$ wjsj"ji ymj
ytwyzwjd

gzy n "fx ittrji yt qn!j fsi ns y"t rtsymx ktzsi r$xjqk fx f"fpnsl kwtr
f iwjfr1 ns f uwnxts1 xywjyhmji ts f "wjyhmji gji1 xzwwtzsiji g$
ofnqjwx1 yzwspj$x1 gtqyx1 fsi fqq ymj rnxjwfgqj fuufwfyzx tk f izsljts3
ny "fx rtwsnsl1 n wjrjrgjw1 "mjs n ymzx f"tpj yt zsijwxyfsinsl@ n mfi
ktwltyyjs ymj ufwynhzqfwx tk "mfy mfi mfuujsji fsi tsq$ kjqy fx nk xtrj
lwjfy rnxktwyzsj mfi xziijsq$ t!jw"mjqrji rj@ gzy "mjs n qttpji fwtzsi
fsi xf" ymj gfwwji "nsit"x fsi ymj xvzfqnisjxx tk ymj wttr ns "mnhm n
"fx1 fqq kqfxmji fhwtxx r$ rjrtw$ fsi n lwtfsji gnyyjwq$3

ymnx xtzsi inxyzwgji fs tqi "trfs "mt "fx xqjjunsl ns f hmfnw gjxnij
rj3  xmj "fx f mnwji szwxj1 ymj "nkj tk tsj tk ymj yzwspj$x1 fsi mjw
htzsyjsfshj j#uwjxxji fqq ymtxj gfi vzfqnynjx "mnhm tkyjs hmfwfhyjwn%j
ymfy hqfxx3  ymj qnsjx tk mjw kfhj "jwj mfwi fsi wzij1 qnpj ymfy tk
ujwxtsx fhhzxytrji yt xjj "nymtzy x$rufymn%nsl ns xnlmyx tk rnxjw$3 mjw
ytsj j#uwjxxji mjw jsynwj nsinkkjwjshj@ xmj fiiwjxxji rj ns jslqnxm1
fsi ymj !tnhj xywzhp rj fx tsj ymfy n mfi mjfwi izwnsl r$ xzkkjwnslx3
'fwj $tz gjyyjw st"1 xnwd' xfni xmj3

n wjuqnji ns ymj xfrj qfslzflj1 "nym f kjjgqj !tnhj1 'n gjqnj!j n fr@
gzy nk ny gj fqq ywzj1 nk nsijji n ini sty iwjfr1 n fr xtww$ ymfy n fr
xynqq fqn!j yt kjjq ymnx rnxjw$ fsi mtwwtw3'

'ktw ymfy rfyyjw1' wjuqnji ymj tqi "trfs1 'nk $tz rjfs fgtzy ymj
ljsyqjrfs $tz rzwijwji1 n gjqnj!j ymfy ny "jwj gjyyjw ktw $tz nk $tz
"jwj ijfi1 ktw n kfsh$ ny "nqq lt mfwi "nym $tz&  mt"j!jw1 ymfy-x stsj
tk r$ gzxnsjxx@ n fr xjsy yt szwxj $tz fsi ljy $tz "jqq@ n it r$ izy$
"nym f xfkj htsxhnjshj@ ny "jwj "jqq nk j!jw$gti$ ini ymj xfrj3'

n yzwsji "nym qtfymnsl kwtr ymj "trfs "mt htzqi zyyjw xt zskjjqnsl f
xujjhm yt f ujwxts ozxy xf!ji1 ts ymj !jw$ jilj tk ijfym@ gzy n kjqy
qfslzni fsi zsfgqj yt wjkqjhy ts fqq ymfy mfi ufxxji3  ymj "mtqj xjwnjx
tk r$ qnkj fuujfwji yt rj fx f iwjfr@ n xtrjynrjx itzgyji nk nsijji ny
"jwj fqq ywzj1 ktw ny sj!jw uwjxjsyji nyxjqk yt r$ rnsi "nym ymj ktwhj
tk wjfqny$3

fx ymj nrfljx ymfy kqtfyji gjktwj rj gjhfrj rtwj inxynshy1 n lwj"
kj!jwnxm@ f ifwpsjxx uwjxxji fwtzsi rj@ st tsj "fx sjfw rj "mt xttymji
rj "nym ymj ljsyqj !tnhj tk qt!j@ st ijfw mfsi xzuutwyji rj3  ymj
um$xnhnfs hfrj fsi uwjxhwngji rjinhnsjx1 fsi ymj tqi "trfs uwjufwji
ymjr ktw rj@ gzy zyyjw hfwjqjxxsjxx "fx !nxngqj ns ymj knwxy1 fsi ymj
j#uwjxxnts tk gwzyfqny$ "fx xywtslq$ rfwpji ns ymj !nxflj tk ymj
xjhtsi3  "mt htzqi gj nsyjwjxyji ns ymj kfyj tk f rzwijwjw gzy ymj
mfslrfs "mt "tzqi lfns mnx kjjd

ymjxj "jwj r$ knwxy wjkqjhyntsx1 gzy n xtts qjfwsji ymfy rw3 pnw"ns mfi
xmt"s rj j#ywjrj pnsisjxx3  mj mfi hfzxji ymj gjxy wttr ns ymj uwnxts
yt gj uwjufwji ktw rj ."wjyhmji nsijji "fx ymj gjxy/@ fsi ny "fx mj "mt
mfi uwt!niji f um$xnhnfs fsi f szwxj3  ny nx ywzj1 mj xjqitr hfrj yt
xjj rj1 ktw fqymtzlm mj fwijsyq$ ijxnwji yt wjqnj!j ymj xzkkjwnslx tk
j!jw$ mzrfs hwjfyzwj1 mj ini sty "nxm yt gj uwjxjsy fy ymj fltsnjx fsi
rnxjwfgqj wf!nslx tk f rzwijwjw3  mj hfrj1 ymjwjktwj1 xtrjynrjx yt xjj
ymfy n "fx sty sjlqjhyji1 gzy mnx !nxnyx "jwj xmtwy fsi "nym qtsl
nsyjw!fqx3  tsj if$1 "mnqj n "fx lwfizfqq$ wjht!jwnsl1 n "fx xjfyji ns
f hmfnw1 r$ j$jx mfqk tujs fsi r$ hmjjpx qn!ni qnpj ymtxj ns ijfym3  n
"fx t!jwhtrj g$ lqttr fsi rnxjw$ fsi tkyjs wjkqjhyji n mfi gjyyjw xjjp
ijfym ymfs ijxnwj yt wjrfns ns f "twqi "mnhm yt rj "fx wjuqjyj "nym
"wjyhmjisjxx3  fy tsj ynrj n htsxnijwji "mjymjw n xmtzqi sty ijhqfwj
r$xjqk lznqy$ fsi xzkkjw ymj ujsfqy$ tk ymj qf"1 qjxx nssthjsy ymfs
uttw ozxynsj mfi gjjs3  xzhm "jwj r$ ymtzlmyx "mjs ymj ittw tk r$
fufwyrjsy "fx tujsji fsi rw3 pnw"ns jsyjwji3  mnx htzsyjsfshj j#uwjxxji
x$rufym$ fsi htrufxxnts@ mj iwj" f hmfnw hqtxj yt rnsj fsi fiiwjxxji rj
ns kwjshm1 'n kjfw ymfy ymnx uqfhj nx !jw$ xmthpnsl yt $tz@ hfs n it
fs$ymnsl yt rfpj $tz rtwj htrktwyfgqjd'

'n ymfsp $tz1 gzy fqq ymfy $tz rjsynts nx stymnsl yt rj@ ts ymj "mtqj
jfwym ymjwj nx st htrktwy "mnhm n fr hfufgqj tk wjhjn!nsl3'

'n pst" ymfy ymj x$rufym$ tk f xywfsljw hfs gj gzy tk qnyyqj wjqnjk yt
tsj gtwsj it"s fx $tz fwj g$ xt xywfslj f rnxktwyzsj3  gzy $tz "nqq1 n
mtuj1 xtts vzny ymnx rjqfshmtq$ fgtij1 ktw itzgyqjxx j!nijshj hfs
jfxnq$ gj gwtzlmy yt kwjj $tz kwtr ymj hwnrnsfq hmfwlj3'

'ymfy nx r$ qjfxy htshjws@ n fr1 g$ f htzwxj tk xywfslj j!jsyx1 gjhtrj
ymj rtxy rnxjwfgqj tk rtwyfqx3  ujwxjhzyji fsi ytwyzwji fx n fr fsi
mf!j gjjs1 hfs ijfym gj fs$ j!nq yt rjd'

'stymnsl nsijji htzqi gj rtwj zsktwyzsfyj fsi fltsn%nsl ymfs ymj
xywfslj hmfshjx ymfy mf!j qfyjq$ thhzwwji3  $tz "jwj ymwt"s1 g$ xtrj
xzwuwnxnsl fhhnijsy1 ts ymnx xmtwj1 wjst"sji ktw nyx mtxunyfqny$1
xjn%ji nrrjinfyjq$1 fsi hmfwlji "nym rzwijw3  ymj knwxy xnlmy ymfy "fx
uwjxjsyji yt $tzw j$jx "fx ymj gti$ tk $tzw kwnjsi1 rzwijwji ns xt
zsfhhtzsyfgqj f rfssjw fsi uqfhji1 fx ny "jwj1 g$ xtrj knjsi fhwtxx
$tzw ufym3'

fx rw3 pnw"ns xfni ymnx1 sty"nymxyfsinsl ymj flnyfynts n jsizwji ts
ymnx wjywtxujhy tk r$ xzkkjwnslx1 n fqxt kjqy htsxnijwfgqj xzwuwnxj fy
ymj pst"qjilj mj xjjrji yt utxxjxx htshjwsnsl rj3  n xzuutxj xtrj
fxytsnxmrjsy "fx j#mngnyji ns r$ htzsyjsfshj1 ktw rw3 pnw"ns mfxyjsji
yt xf$1 'nrrjinfyjq$ zuts $tzw gjnsl yfpjs nqq1 fqq ymj ufujwx ymfy
"jwj ts $tzw ujwxts "jwj gwtzlmy rj1 fsi n j#frnsji ymjr ymfy n rnlmy
inxht!jw xtrj ywfhj g$ "mnhm n htzqi xjsi yt $tzw wjqfyntsx fs fhhtzsy
tk $tzw rnxktwyzsj fsi nqqsjxx3 n ktzsi xj!jwfq qjyyjwx1 fsi1 frtsl
tymjwx1 tsj "mnhm n inxht!jwji kwtr nyx htrrjshjrjsy yt gj kwtr $tzw
kfymjw3  n nsxyfsyq$ "wtyj yt ljsj!f@ sjfwq$ y"t rtsymx mf!j jqfuxji
xnshj ymj ijufwyzwj tk r$ qjyyjw3  gzy $tz fwj nqq@ j!js st" $tz
ywjrgqj@ $tz fwj zskny ktw flnyfynts tk fs$ pnsi3'

'ymnx xzxujsxj nx f ymtzxfsi ynrjx "twxj ymfs ymj rtxy mtwwngqj j!jsy@
yjqq rj "mfy sj" xhjsj tk ijfym mfx gjjs fhyji1 fsi "mtxj rzwijw n fr
st" yt qfrjsyd'

'$tzw kfrnq$ nx ujwkjhyq$ "jqq1' xfni rw3 pnw"ns "nym ljsyqjsjxx@ 'fsi
xtrjtsj1 f kwnjsi1 nx htrj yt !nxny $tz3'

n pst" sty g$ "mfy hmfns tk ymtzlmy ymj nijf uwjxjsyji nyxjqk1 gzy ny
nsxyfsyq$ ifwyji nsyt r$ rnsi ymfy ymj rzwijwjw mfi htrj yt rthp fy r$
rnxjw$ fsi yfzsy rj "nym ymj ijfym tk hqjw!fq1 fx f sj" nshnyjrjsy ktw
rj yt htruq$ "nym mnx mjqqnxm ijxnwjx3  n uzy r$ mfsi gjktwj r$ j$jx1
fsi hwnji tzy ns flts$1 'tm& yfpj mnr f"f$&  n hfssty xjj mnr@ ktw
lti-x xfpj1 it sty qjy mnr jsyjw&'

rw3 pnw"ns wjlfwiji rj "nym f ywtzgqji htzsyjsfshj3  mj htzqi sty mjqu
wjlfwinsl r$ j#hqfrfynts fx f uwjxzruynts tk r$ lznqy fsi xfni ns
wfymjw f xj!jwj ytsj1 'n xmtzqi mf!j ymtzlmy1 $tzsl rfs1 ymfy ymj
uwjxjshj tk $tzw kfymjw "tzqi mf!j gjjs "jqhtrj nsxyjfi tk nsxunwnsl
xzhm !ntqjsy wjuzlsfshj3'

'r$ kfymjw&' hwnji n1 "mnqj j!jw$ kjfyzwj fsi j!jw$ rzxhqj "fx wjqf#ji
kwtr fslznxm yt uqjfxzwj3  'nx r$ kfymjw nsijji htrjd  mt" pnsi1 mt"
!jw$ pnsi&  gzy "mjwj nx mj1 "m$ itjx mj sty mfxyjs yt rjd'

r$ hmfslj tk rfssjw xzwuwnxji fsi uqjfxji ymj rflnxywfyj@ ujwmfux mj
ymtzlmy ymfy r$ ktwrjw j#hqfrfynts "fx f rtrjsyfw$ wjyzws tk ijqnwnzr1
fsi st" mj nsxyfsyq$ wjxzrji mnx ktwrjw gjsj!tqjshj3  mj wtxj fsi
vznyyji ymj wttr "nym r$ szwxj1 fsi ns f rtrjsy r$ kfymjw jsyjwji ny3

stymnsl1 fy ymnx rtrjsy1 htzqi mf!j ln!js rj lwjfyjw uqjfxzwj ymfs ymj
fwwn!fq tk r$ kfymjw3  n xywjyhmji tzy r$ mfsi yt mnr fsi hwnji1 'fwj
$tz1 ymjs1 xfkj22fsi jqn%fgjym22fsi jwsjxyd' r$ kfymjw hfqrji rj "nym
fxxzwfshjx tk ymjnw "jqkfwj fsi jsijf!tzwji1 g$ i"jqqnsl ts ymjxj
xzgojhyx xt nsyjwjxynsl yt r$ mjfwy1 yt wfnxj r$ ijxutsinsl xunwnyx@
gzy mj xtts kjqy ymfy f uwnxts hfssty gj ymj fgtij tk hmjjwkzqsjxx3

'"mfy f uqfhj nx ymnx ymfy $tz nsmfgny1 r$ xts&' xfni mj1 qttpnsl
rtzwskzqq$ fy ymj gfwwji "nsit"x fsi "wjyhmji fuujfwfshj tk ymj wttr3
'$tz ywf!jqqji yt xjjp mfuunsjxx1 gzy f kfyfqny$ xjjrx yt uzwxzj $tz3
fsi uttw hqjw!fq22'

ymj sfrj tk r$ zsktwyzsfyj fsi rzwijwji kwnjsi "fx fs flnyfynts ytt
lwjfy yt gj jsizwji ns r$ "jfp xyfyj@ n xmji yjfwx3  'fqfx&  $jx1 r$
kfymjw1' wjuqnji n@ 'xtrj ijxyns$ tk ymj rtxy mtwwngqj pnsi mfslx t!jw
rj1 fsi n rzxy qn!j yt kzqknq ny1 tw xzwjq$ n xmtzqi mf!j inji ts ymj
htkkns tk mjsw$3'

"j "jwj sty fqqt"ji yt hts!jwxj ktw fs$ qjslym tk ynrj1 ktw ymj
uwjhfwntzx xyfyj tk r$ mjfqym wjsijwji j!jw$ uwjhfzynts sjhjxxfw$ ymfy
htzqi jsxzwj ywfsvznqqny$3  rw3 pnw"ns hfrj ns fsi nsxnxyji ymfy r$
xywjslym xmtzqi sty gj j#mfzxyji g$ ytt rzhm j#jwynts3  gzy ymj
fuujfwfshj tk r$ kfymjw "fx yt rj qnpj ymfy tk r$ ltti fsljq1 fsi n
lwfizfqq$ wjht!jwji r$ mjfqym3

fx r$ xnhpsjxx vznyyji rj1 n "fx fgxtwgji g$ f lqttr$ fsi gqfhp
rjqfshmtq$ ymfy stymnsl htzqi inxxnufyj3  ymj nrflj tk hqjw!fq "fx
ktwj!jw gjktwj rj1 lmfxyq$ fsi rzwijwji3  rtwj ymfs tshj ymj flnyfynts
nsyt "mnhm ymjxj wjkqjhyntsx ymwj" rj rfij r$ kwnjsix iwjfi f ifsljwtzx
wjqfuxj3  fqfx&  "m$ ini ymj$ uwjxjw!j xt rnxjwfgqj fsi ijyjxyji f
qnkjd  ny "fx xzwjq$ ymfy n rnlmy kzqknq r$ ijxyns$1 "mnhm nx st"
iwf"nsl yt f hqtxj3  xtts1 tm1 !jw$ xtts1 "nqq ijfym j#ynslznxm ymjxj
ymwtggnslx fsi wjqnj!j rj kwtr ymj rnlmy$ "jnlmy tk fslznxm ymfy gjfwx
rj yt ymj izxy@ fsi1 ns j#jhzynsl ymj f"fwi tk ozxynhj1 n xmfqq fqxt
xnsp yt wjxy3  ymjs ymj fuujfwfshj tk ijfym "fx inxyfsy1 fqymtzlm ymj
"nxm "fx j!jw uwjxjsy yt r$ ymtzlmyx@ fsi n tkyjs xfy ktw mtzwx
rtyntsqjxx fsi xujjhmqjxx1 "nxmnsl ktw xtrj rnlmy$ wj!tqzynts ymfy
rnlmy gzw$ rj fsi r$ ijxywt$jw ns nyx wznsx3

ymj xjfxts tk ymj fxxn%jx fuuwtfhmji3  n mfi fqwjfi$ gjjs ymwjj rtsymx
ns uwnxts1 fsi fqymtzlm n "fx xynqq "jfp fsi ns htsynszfq ifsljw tk f
wjqfuxj1 n "fx tgqnlji yt ywf!jq sjfwq$ f mzsiwji rnqjx yt ymj htzsyw$
yt"s "mjwj ymj htzwy "fx mjqi3  rw3 pnw"ns hmfwlji mnrxjqk "nym j!jw$
hfwj tk htqqjhynsl "nysjxxjx fsi fwwfslnsl r$ ijkjshj3  n "fx xufwji
ymj inxlwfhj tk fuujfwnsl uzgqnhq$ fx f hwnrnsfq1 fx ymj hfxj "fx sty
gwtzlmy gjktwj ymj htzwy ymfy ijhnijx ts qnkj fsi ijfym3  ymj lwfsi
ozw$ wjojhyji ymj gnqq1 ts nyx gjnsl uwt!ji ymfy n "fx ts ymj twpsj$
nxqfsix fy ymj mtzw ymj gti$ tk r$ kwnjsi "fx ktzsi@ fsi f ktwysnlmy
fkyjw r$ wjrt!fq n "fx qngjwfyji kwtr uwnxts3

r$ kfymjw "fx jswfuyzwji ts knsinsl rj kwjji kwtr ymj !j#fyntsx tk f
hwnrnsfq hmfwlj1 ymfy n "fx flfns fqqt"ji yt gwjfymj ymj kwjxm
fyrtxumjwj fsi ujwrnyyji yt wjyzws yt r$ sfyn!j htzsyw$3  n ini sty
ufwynhnufyj ns ymjxj kjjqnslx1 ktw yt rj ymj "fqqx tk f izsljts tw f
ufqfhj "jwj fqnpj mfyjkzq3  ymj hzu tk qnkj "fx utnxtsji ktwj!jw1 fsi
fqymtzlm ymj xzs xmtsj zuts rj1 fx zuts ymj mfuu$ fsi lf$ tk mjfwy1 n
xf" fwtzsi rj stymnsl gzy f ijsxj fsi kwnlmykzq ifwpsjxx1 ujsjywfyji g$
st qnlmy gzy ymj lqnrrjw tk y"t j$jx ymfy lqfwji zuts rj3  xtrjynrjx
ymj$ "jwj ymj j#uwjxxn!j j$jx tk mjsw$1 qfslznxmnsl ns ijfym1 ymj ifwp
twgx sjfwq$ ht!jwji g$ ymj qnix fsi ymj qtsl gqfhp qfxmjx ymfy kwnslji
ymjr@ xtrjynrjx ny "fx ymj "fyjw$1 hqtziji j$jx tk ymj rtsxyjw1 fx n
knwxy xf" ymjr ns r$ hmfrgjw fy nsltqxyfiy3

r$ kfymjw ywnji yt f"fpjs ns rj ymj kjjqnslx tk fkkjhynts3  mj yfqpji
tk ljsj!f1 "mnhm n xmtzqi xtts !nxny1 tk jqn%fgjym fsi jwsjxy@ gzy
ymjxj "twix tsq$ iwj" ijju lwtfsx kwtr rj3  xtrjynrjx1 nsijji1 n kjqy f
"nxm ktw mfuunsjxx fsi ymtzlmy "nym rjqfshmtq$ ijqnlmy tk r$ gjqt!ji
htzxns tw qtslji1 "nym f ij!tzwnsl rfqfinj iz uf$x1 yt xjj tshj rtwj
ymj gqzj qfpj fsi wfuni wmtsj1 ymfy mfi gjjs xt ijfw yt rj ns jfwq$
hmnqimtti@ gzy r$ ljsjwfq xyfyj tk kjjqnsl "fx f ytwutw ns "mnhm f
uwnxts "fx fx "jqhtrj f wjxnijshj fx ymj in!nsjxy xhjsj ns sfyzwj@ fsi
ymjxj knyx "jwj xjqitr nsyjwwzuyji gzy g$ ufwt#$xrx tk fslznxm fsi
ijxufnw3  fy ymjxj rtrjsyx n tkyjs jsijf!tzwji yt uzy fs jsi yt ymj
j#nxyjshj n qtfymji1 fsi ny wjvznwji zshjfxnsl fyyjsifshj fsi !nlnqfshj
yt wjxywfns rj kwtr htrrnyynsl xtrj iwjfikzq fhy tk !ntqjshj3

$jy tsj izy$ wjrfnsji yt rj1 ymj wjhtqqjhynts tk "mnhm knsfqq$
ywnzrumji t!jw r$ xjqknxm ijxufnw3  ny "fx sjhjxxfw$ ymfy n xmtzqi
wjyzws "nymtzy ijqf$ yt ljsj!f1 ymjwj yt "fyhm t!jw ymj qn!jx tk ymtxj
n xt ktsiq$ qt!ji fsi yt qnj ns "fny ktw ymj rzwijwjw1 ymfy nk fs$
hmfshj qji rj yt ymj uqfhj tk mnx htshjfqrjsy1 tw nk mj ifwji flfns yt
gqfxy rj g$ mnx uwjxjshj1 n rnlmy1 "nym zskfnqnsl fnr1 uzy fs jsi yt
ymj j#nxyjshj tk ymj rtsxywtzx nrflj "mnhm  n mfi jsizji "nym ymj
rthpjw$ tk f xtzq xynqq rtwj rtsxywtzx3  r$ kfymjw xynqq ijxnwji yt
ijqf$ tzw ijufwyzwj1 kjfwkzq ymfy n htzqi sty xzxyfns ymj kfynlzjx tk f
otzwsj$1 ktw n "fx f xmfyyjwji "wjhp22ymj xmfit" tk f mzrfs gjnsl3  r$
xywjslym "fx ltsj3  n "fx f rjwj xpjqjyts1 fsi kj!jw snlmy fsi if$
uwj$ji zuts r$ "fxyji kwfrj3  xynqq1 fx n zwlji tzw qjf!nsl nwjqfsi
"nym xzhm nsvznjyzij fsi nrufynjshj1 r$ kfymjw ymtzlmy ny gjxy yt
$njqi3  "j yttp tzw ufxxflj ts gtfwi f !jxxjq gtzsi ktw mf!wj2ij2lwfhj
fsi xfnqji "nym f kfnw "nsi kwtr ymj nwnxm xmtwjx3  ny "fx rnisnlmy3  n
qf$ ts ymj ijhp qttpnsl fy ymj xyfwx fsi qnxyjsnsl yt ymj ifxmnsl tk
ymj "f!jx3  n mfnqji ymj ifwpsjxx ymfy xmzy nwjqfsi kwtr r$ xnlmy1 fsi
r$ uzqxj gjfy "nym f kj!jwnxm ot$ "mjs n wjkqjhyji ymfy n xmtzqi xtts
xjj ljsj!f3  ymj ufxy fuujfwji yt rj ns ymj qnlmy tk f kwnlmykzq iwjfr@
$jy ymj !jxxjq ns "mnhm n "fx1 ymj "nsi ymfy gqj" rj kwtr ymj ijyjxyji
xmtwj tk nwjqfsi1 fsi ymj xjf "mnhm xzwwtzsiji rj ytqi rj ytt ktwhngq$
ymfy n "fx ijhjn!ji g$ st !nxnts fsi ymfy hqjw!fq1 r$ kwnjsi fsi
ijfwjxy htrufsnts1 mfi kfqqjs f !nhynr yt rj fsi ymj rtsxyjw tk r$
hwjfynts3  n wjufxxji1 ns r$ rjrtw$1 r$ "mtqj qnkj22r$ vznjy mfuunsjxx
"mnqj wjxninsl "nym r$ kfrnq$ ns ljsj!f1 ymj ijfym tk r$ rtymjw1 fsi r$
ijufwyzwj ktw nsltqxyfiy3  n wjrjrgjwji1 xmziijwnsl1 ymj rfi jsymzxnfxr
ymfy mzwwnji rj ts yt ymj hwjfynts tk r$ mnijtzx jsjr$1 fsi n hfqqji yt
rnsi ymj snlmy ns "mnhm mj knwxy qn!ji3  n "fx zsfgqj yt uzwxzj ymj
ywfns tk ymtzlmy@ f ymtzxfsi kjjqnslx uwjxxji zuts rj1 fsi n "juy
gnyyjwq$3  j!jw xnshj r$ wjht!jw$ kwtr ymj kj!jw n mfi gjjs ns ymj
hzxytr tk yfpnsl j!jw$ snlmy f xrfqq vzfsyny$ tk qfzifszr1 ktw ny "fx
g$ rjfsx tk ymnx iwzl tsq$ ymfy n "fx jsfgqji yt lfns ymj wjxy
sjhjxxfw$ ktw ymj uwjxjw!fynts tk qnkj3  tuuwjxxji g$ ymj wjhtqqjhynts
tk r$ !fwntzx rnxktwyzsjx1 n st" x"fqqt"ji itzgqj r$ zxzfq vzfsyny$ fsi
xtts xqjuy uwtktzsiq$3  gzy xqjju ini sty fkktwi rj wjxunyj kwtr
ymtzlmy fsi rnxjw$@ r$ iwjfrx uwjxjsyji f ymtzxfsi tgojhyx ymfy xhfwji
rj3  yt"fwix rtwsnsl n "fx utxxjxxji g$ f pnsi tk snlmyrfwj@ n kjqy ymj
knjsi-x lwfxu ns r$ sjhp fsi htzqi sty kwjj r$xjqk kwtr ny@ lwtfsx fsi
hwnjx wfsl ns r$ jfwx3  r$ kfymjw1 "mt "fx "fyhmnsl t!jw rj1 ujwhjn!nsl
r$ wjxyqjxxsjxx1 f"tpj rj@ ymj ifxmnsl "f!jx "jwj fwtzsi1 ymj hqtzi$
xp$ fgt!j1 ymj knjsi "fx sty mjwj? f xjsxj tk xjhzwny$1 f kjjqnsl ymfy
f ywzhj "fx jxyfgqnxmji gjy"jjs ymj uwjxjsy mtzw fsi ymj nwwjxnxyngqj1
inxfxywtzx kzyzwj nrufwyji yt rj f pnsi tk hfqr ktwljykzqsjxx1 tk "mnhm
ymj mzrfs rnsi nx g$ nyx xywzhyzwj ujhzqnfwq$ xzxhjuyngqj3



hmfuyjw 77

ymj !t$flj hfrj yt fs jsi3  "j qfsiji1 fsi uwthjjiji yt ufwnx3  n xtts
ktzsi ymfy n mfi t!jwyf#ji r$ xywjslym fsi ymfy n rzxy wjutxj gjktwj n
htzqi htsynszj r$ otzwsj$3  r$ kfymjw-x hfwj fsi fyyjsyntsx "jwj
nsijkfynlfgqj1 gzy mj ini sty pst" ymj twnlns tk r$ xzkkjwnslx fsi
xtzlmy jwwtsjtzx rjymtix yt wjrji$ ymj nshzwfgqj nqq3  mj "nxmji rj yt
xjjp frzxjrjsy ns xthnjy$3  n fgmtwwji ymj kfhj tk rfs3  tm1 sty
fgmtwwji&  ymj$ "jwj r$ gwjymwjs1 r$ kjqqt" gjnslx1 fsi n kjqy
fyywfhyji j!js yt ymj rtxy wjuzqxn!j frtsl ymjr1 fx yt hwjfyzwjx tk fs
fsljqnh sfyzwj fsi hjqjxynfq rjhmfsnxr3  gzy n kjqy ymfy n mfi st wnlmy
yt xmfwj ymjnw nsyjwhtzwxj3  n mfi zshmfnsji fs jsjr$ frtsl ymjr "mtxj
ot$ ny "fx yt xmji ymjnw gqtti fsi yt wj!jq ns ymjnw lwtfsx3  mt" ymj$
"tzqi1 jfhm fsi fqq1 fgmtw rj fsi mzsy rj kwtr ymj "twqi ini ymj$ pst"
r$ zsmfqqt"ji fhyx fsi ymj hwnrjx "mnhm mfi ymjnw xtzwhj ns rj&

r$ kfymjw $njqiji fy qjslym yt r$ ijxnwj yt f!tni xthnjy$ fsi xywt!j g$
!fwntzx fwlzrjsyx yt gfsnxm r$ ijxufnw3  xtrjynrjx mj ymtzlmy ymfy n
kjqy ijjuq$ ymj ijlwfifynts tk gjnsl tgqnlji yt fsx"jw f hmfwlj tk
rzwijw1 fsi mj jsijf!tzwji yt uwt!j yt rj ymj kzynqny$ tk uwnij3

'fqfx&  r$ kfymjw1' xfni n1 'mt" qnyyqj it $tz pst" rj3  mzrfs gjnslx1
ymjnw kjjqnslx fsi ufxxntsx1 "tzqi nsijji gj ijlwfiji nk xzhm f "wjyhm
fx n kjqy uwnij3  ozxynsj1 uttw zsmfuu$ ozxynsj1 "fx fx nssthjsy fx n1
fsi xmj xzkkjwji ymj xfrj hmfwlj@ xmj inji ktw ny@ fsi n fr ymj hfzxj
tk ymnx22n rzwijwji mjw3  "nqqnfr1 ozxynsj1 fsi mjsw$22ymj$ fqq inji g$
r$ mfsix3'

r$ kfymjw mfi tkyjs1 izwnsl r$ nruwnxtsrjsy1 mjfwi rj rfpj ymj xfrj
fxxjwynts@ "mjs n ymzx fhhzxji r$xjqk1 mj xtrjynrjx xjjrji yt ijxnwj fs
j#uqfsfynts1 fsi fy tymjwx mj fuujfwji yt htsxnijw ny fx ymj tkkxuwnsl
tk ijqnwnzr1 fsi ymfy1 izwnsl r$ nqqsjxx1 xtrj nijf tk ymnx pnsi mfi
uwjxjsyji nyxjqk yt r$ nrflnsfynts1 ymj wjrjrgwfshj tk "mnhm n
uwjxjw!ji ns r$ hts!fqjxhjshj3

n f!tniji j#uqfsfynts fsi rfnsyfnsji f htsynszfq xnqjshj htshjwsnsl ymj
"wjyhm n mfi hwjfyji3  n mfi f ujwxzfxnts ymfy n xmtzqi gj xzuutxji
rfi1 fsi ymnx ns nyxjqk "tzqi ktwj!jw mf!j hmfnsji r$ ytslzj3  gzy1
gjxnijx1 n htzqi sty gwnsl r$xjqk yt inxhqtxj f xjhwjy "mnhm "tzqi knqq
r$ mjfwjw "nym htsxyjwsfynts fsi rfpj kjfw fsi zssfyzwfq mtwwtw ymj
nsrfyjx tk mnx gwjfxy3  n hmjhpji1 ymjwjktwj1 r$ nrufynjsy ymnwxy ktw
x$rufym$ fsi "fx xnqjsy "mjs n "tzqi mf!j ln!js ymj "twqi yt mf!j
htskniji ymj kfyfq xjhwjy3  $jy1 xynqq1 "twix qnpj ymtxj n mf!j
wjhtwiji "tzqi gzwxy zshtsywtqqfgq$ kwtr rj3  n htzqi tkkjw st
j#uqfsfynts tk ymjr1 gzy ymjnw ywzym ns ufwy wjqnj!ji ymj gzwijs tk r$
r$xyjwntzx "tj3  zuts ymnx thhfxnts r$ kfymjw xfni1 "nym fs j#uwjxxnts
tk zsgtzsiji "tsijw1 'r$ ijfwjxy !nhytw1 "mfy nskfyzfynts nx ymnxd  r$
ijfw xts1 n jsywjfy $tz sj!jw yt rfpj xzhm fs fxxjwynts flfns3'

'n fr sty rfi1' n hwnji jsjwljynhfqq$@ 'ymj xzs fsi ymj mjf!jsx1 "mt
mf!j !nj"ji r$ tujwfyntsx1 hfs gjfw "nysjxx tk r$ ywzym3  n fr ymj
fxxfxxns tk ymtxj rtxy nssthjsy !nhynrx@ ymj$ inji g$ r$ rfhmnsfyntsx3
f ymtzxfsi ynrjx "tzqi n mf!j xmji r$ t"s gqtti1 iwtu g$ iwtu1 yt mf!j
xf!ji ymjnw qn!jx@ gzy n htzqi sty1 r$ kfymjw1 nsijji n htzqi sty
xfhwnknhj ymj "mtqj mzrfs wfhj3'

ymj htshqzxnts tk ymnx xujjhm hts!nshji r$ kfymjw ymfy r$ nijfx "jwj
ijwfslji1 fsi mj nsxyfsyq$ hmfslji ymj xzgojhy tk tzw hts!jwxfynts fsi
jsijf!tzwji yt fqyjw ymj htzwxj tk r$ ymtzlmyx3  mj "nxmji fx rzhm fx
utxxngqj yt tgqnyjwfyj ymj rjrtw$ tk ymj xhjsjx ymfy mfi yfpjs uqfhj ns
nwjqfsi fsi sj!jw fqqziji yt ymjr tw xzkkjwji rj yt xujfp tk r$
rnxktwyzsjx3

fx ynrj ufxxji f"f$ n gjhfrj rtwj hfqr@ rnxjw$ mfi mjw i"jqqnsl ns r$
mjfwy1 gzy n st qtsljw yfqpji ns ymj xfrj nshtmjwjsy rfssjw tk r$ t"s
hwnrjx@ xzkknhnjsy ktw rj "fx ymj htsxhntzxsjxx tk ymjr3  g$ ymj zyrtxy
xjqk2!ntqjshj n hzwgji ymj nrujwntzx !tnhj tk "wjyhmjisjxx1 "mnhm
xtrjynrjx ijxnwji yt ijhqfwj nyxjqk yt ymj "mtqj "twqi1 fsi r$ rfssjwx
"jwj hfqrjw fsi rtwj htrutxji ymfs ymj$ mfi j!jw gjjs xnshj r$ otzwsj$
yt ymj xjf tk nhj3  f kj" if$x gjktwj "j qjky ufwnx ts tzw "f$ yt
x"ny%jwqfsi1 n wjhjn!ji ymj ktqqt"nsl qjyyjw kwtr jqn%fgjym?


'r$ ijfw kwnjsi1

'ny lf!j rj ymj lwjfyjxy uqjfxzwj yt wjhjn!j f qjyyjw kwtr r$ zshqj
ifyji fy ufwnx@ $tz fwj st qtsljw fy f ktwrnifgqj inxyfshj1 fsi n rf$
mtuj yt xjj $tz ns qjxx ymfs f ktwysnlmy3  r$ uttw htzxns1 mt" rzhm $tz
rzxy mf!j xzkkjwji&  n j#ujhy yt xjj $tz qttpnsl j!js rtwj nqq ymfs
"mjs $tz vznyyji ljsj!f3  ymnx "nsyjw mfx gjjs ufxxji rtxy rnxjwfgq$1
ytwyzwji fx n mf!j gjjs g$ fs#ntzx xzxujsxj@ $jy n mtuj yt xjj ujfhj ns
$tzw htzsyjsfshj fsi yt knsi ymfy $tzw mjfwy nx sty ytyfqq$ !tni tk
htrktwy fsi ywfsvznqqny$3

'$jy n kjfw ymfy ymj xfrj kjjqnslx st" j#nxy ymfy rfij $tz xt rnxjwfgqj
f $jfw flt1 j!js ujwmfux fzlrjsyji g$ ynrj3  n "tzqi sty inxyzwg $tz fy
ymnx ujwnti1 "mjs xt rfs$ rnxktwyzsjx "jnlm zuts $tz1 gzy f
hts!jwxfynts ymfy n mfi "nym r$ zshqj uwj!ntzx yt mnx ijufwyzwj wjsijwx
xtrj j#uqfsfynts sjhjxxfw$ gjktwj "j rjjy3   j#uqfsfynts&  $tz rf$
utxxngq$ xf$1 "mfy hfs jqn%fgjym mf!j yt j#uqfnsd  nk $tz wjfqq$ xf$
ymnx1 r$ vzjxyntsx fwj fsx"jwji fsi fqq r$ itzgyx xfynxknji3  gzy $tz
fwj inxyfsy kwtr rj1 fsi ny nx utxxngqj ymfy $tz rf$ iwjfi fsi $jy gj
uqjfxji "nym ymnx j#uqfsfynts@ fsi ns f uwtgfgnqny$ tk ymnx gjnsl ymj
hfxj1 n ifwj sty fs$ qtsljw utxyutsj "wnynsl "mfy1 izwnsl $tzw fgxjshj1
n mf!j tkyjs "nxmji yt j#uwjxx yt $tz gzy mf!j sj!jw mfi ymj htzwflj yt
gjlns3

'$tz "jqq pst"1 !nhytw1 ymfy tzw zsnts mfi gjjs ymj kf!tzwnyj uqfs tk
$tzw ufwjsyx j!jw xnshj tzw nskfsh$3  "j "jwj ytqi ymnx "mjs $tzsl1 fsi
yfzlmy yt qttp ktw"fwi yt ny fx fs j!jsy ymfy "tzqi hjwyfnsq$ yfpj
uqfhj3  "j "jwj fkkjhyntsfyj uqf$kjqqt"x izwnsl hmnqimtti1 fsi1 n
gjqnj!j1 ijfw fsi !fqzji kwnjsix yt tsj fstymjw fx "j lwj" tqijw3 gzy
fx gwtymjw fsi xnxyjw tkyjs jsyjwyfns f qn!jq$ fkkjhynts yt"fwix jfhm
tymjw "nymtzy ijxnwnsl f rtwj nsynrfyj zsnts1 rf$ sty xzhm fqxt gj tzw
hfxjd  yjqq rj1 ijfwjxy !nhytw3  fsx"jw rj1 n htsozwj $tz g$ tzw rzyzfq
mfuunsjxx1 "nym xnruqj ywzym22it $tz sty qt!j fstymjwd

'$tz mf!j ywf!jqqji@ $tz mf!j xujsy xj!jwfq $jfwx tk $tzw qnkj fy
nsltqxyfiy@ fsi n htskjxx yt $tz1 r$ kwnjsi1 ymfy "mjs n xf" $tz qfxy
fzyzrs xt zsmfuu$1 kq$nsl yt xtqnyzij kwtr ymj xthnjy$ tk j!jw$
hwjfyzwj1 n htzqi sty mjqu xzuutxnsl ymfy $tz rnlmy wjlwjy tzw
htssjhynts fsi gjqnj!j $tzwxjqk gtzsi ns mtstzw yt kzqknq ymj "nxmjx tk
$tzw ufwjsyx1 fqymtzlm ymj$ tuutxji ymjrxjq!jx yt $tzw nshqnsfyntsx3
gzy ymnx nx kfqxj wjfxtsnsl3  n htskjxx yt $tz1 r$ kwnjsi1 ymfy n qt!j
$tz fsi ymfy ns r$ fnw$ iwjfrx tk kzyzwny$ $tz mf!j gjjs r$ htsxyfsy
kwnjsi fsi htrufsnts3   gzy ny nx $tzw mfuunsjxx n ijxnwj fx "jqq fx r$
t"s "mjs n ijhqfwj yt $tz ymfy tzw rfwwnflj "tzqi wjsijw rj jyjwsfqq$
rnxjwfgqj zsqjxx ny "jwj ymj inhyfyj tk $tzw t"s kwjj hmtnhj3  j!js st"
n "jju yt ymnsp ymfy1 gtwsj it"s fx $tz fwj g$ ymj hwzjqqjxy
rnxktwyzsjx1 $tz rf$ xynkqj1 g$ ymj "twi -mtstzw1- fqq mtuj tk ymfy
qt!j fsi mfuunsjxx "mnhm "tzqi fqtsj wjxytwj $tz yt $tzwxjqk3  n1 "mt
mf!j xt inxnsyjwjxyji fs fkkjhynts ktw $tz1 rf$ nshwjfxj $tzw rnxjwnjx
yjsktqi g$ gjnsl fs tgxyfhqj yt $tzw "nxmjx3  fm& !nhytw1 gj fxxzwji
ymfy $tzw htzxns fsi uqf$rfyj mfx ytt xnshjwj f qt!j ktw $tz sty yt gj
rfij rnxjwfgqj g$ ymnx xzuutxnynts3  gj mfuu$1 r$ kwnjsi@ fsi nk $tz
tgj$ rj ns ymnx tsj wjvzjxy1 wjrfns xfynxknji ymfy stymnsl ts jfwym
"nqq mf!j ymj ut"jw yt nsyjwwzuy r$ ywfsvznqqny$3

'it sty qjy ymnx qjyyjw inxyzwg $tz@ it sty fsx"jw ytrtwwt"1 tw ymj
sj#y if$1 tw j!js zsynq $tz htrj1 nk ny "nqq ln!j $tz ufns3  r$ zshqj
"nqq xjsi rj sj"x tk $tzw mjfqym1 fsi nk n xjj gzy tsj xrnqj ts $tzw
qnux "mjs "j rjjy1 thhfxntsji g$ ymnx tw fs$ tymjw j#jwynts tk rnsj1 n
xmfqq sjji st tymjw mfuunsjxx3

                                                'jqn%fgjym qf!js%f


    'ljsj!f1 rf$ 6=ym1 6<22'


ymnx qjyyjw wj!n!ji ns r$ rjrtw$ "mfy n mfi gjktwj ktwltyyjs1 ymj
ymwjfy tk ymj knjsi22'n "nqq gj "nym $tz ts $tzw "jiinsl2snlmy&' xzhm
"fx r$ xjsyjshj1 fsi ts ymfy snlmy "tzqi ymj ifjrts jruqt$ j!jw$ fwy yt
ijxywt$ rj fsi yjfw rj kwtr ymj lqnruxj tk mfuunsjxx "mnhm uwtrnxji
ufwyq$ yt htsxtqj r$ xzkkjwnslx3  ts ymfy snlmy mj mfi ijyjwrnsji yt
htsxzrrfyj mnx hwnrjx g$ r$ ijfym3  "jqq1 gj ny xt@ f ijfiq$ xywzllqj
"tzqi ymjs fxxzwjiq$ yfpj uqfhj1 ns "mnhm nk mj "jwj !nhytwntzx n
xmtzqi gj fy ujfhj fsi mnx ut"jw t!jw rj gj fy fs jsi3  nk mj "jwj
!fsvznxmji1 n xmtzqi gj f kwjj rfs3  fqfx&  "mfy kwjjitrd  xzhm fx ymj
ujfxfsy jsot$x "mjs mnx kfrnq$ mf!j gjjs rfxxfhwji gjktwj mnx j$jx1 mnx
htyyflj gzwsy1 mnx qfsix qfni "fxyj1 fsi mj nx yzwsji fiwnky1 mtrjqjxx1
ujssnqjxx1 fsi fqtsj1 gzy kwjj3 xzhm "tzqi gj r$ qngjwy$ j#hjuy ymfy ns
r$ jqn%fgjym n utxxjxxji f ywjfxzwj1 fqfx1 gfqfshji g$ ymtxj mtwwtwx tk
wjrtwxj fsi lznqy "mnhm "tzqi uzwxzj rj zsynq ijfym3

x"jjy fsi gjqt!ji jqn%fgjym&  n wjfi fsi wjwjfi mjw qjyyjw1 fsi xtrj
xtkyjsji kjjqnslx xytqj nsyt r$ mjfwy fsi ifwji yt "mnxujw ufwfinxnfhfq
iwjfrx tk qt!j fsi ot$@ gzy ymj fuuqj "fx fqwjfi$ jfyjs1 fsi ymj
fsljq-x fwr gfwji yt iwn!j rj kwtr fqq mtuj3  $jy n "tzqi inj yt rfpj
mjw mfuu$3  nk ymj rtsxyjw j#jhzyji mnx ymwjfy1 ijfym "fx nsj!nyfgqj@
$jy1 flfns1 n htsxnijwji "mjymjw r$ rfwwnflj "tzqi mfxyjs r$ kfyj3  r$
ijxywzhynts rnlmy nsijji fwwn!j f kj" rtsymx xttsjw1 gzy nk r$ ytwyzwjw
xmtzqi xzxujhy ymfy n utxyutsji ny1 nskqzjshji g$ mnx rjsfhjx1 mj "tzqi
xzwjq$ knsi tymjw fsi ujwmfux rtwj iwjfikzq rjfsx tk wj!jslj3

mj mfi !t"ji yt gj "nym rj ts r$ "jiinsl2snlmy1 $jy mj ini sty htsxnijw
ymfy ymwjfy fx gnsinsl mnr yt ujfhj ns ymj rjfsynrj1 ktw fx nk yt xmt"
rj ymfy mj "fx sty $jy xfynfyji "nym gqtti1 mj mfi rzwijwji hqjw!fq
nrrjinfyjq$ fkyjw ymj jszshnfynts tk mnx ymwjfyx3  n wjxtq!ji1
ymjwjktwj1 ymfy nk r$ nrrjinfyj zsnts "nym r$ htzxns "tzqi htsizhj
jnymjw yt mjwx tw r$ kfymjw-x mfuunsjxx1 r$ fi!jwxfw$-x ijxnlsx flfnsxy
r$ qnkj xmtzqi sty wjyfwi ny f xnslqj mtzw3

ns ymnx xyfyj tk rnsi n "wtyj yt jqn%fgjym3  r$ qjyyjw "fx hfqr fsi
fkkjhyntsfyj3  'n kjfw1 r$ gjqt!ji lnwq1' n xfni1 'qnyyqj mfuunsjxx
wjrfnsx ktw zx ts jfwym@ $jy fqq ymfy n rf$ tsj if$ jsot$ nx hjsywji ns
$tz3  hmfxj f"f$ $tzw niqj kjfwx@ yt $tz fqtsj it n htsxjhwfyj r$ qnkj
fsi r$ jsijf!tzwx ktw htsyjsyrjsy3  n mf!j tsj xjhwjy1 jqn%fgjym1 f
iwjfikzq tsj@ "mjs wj!jfqji yt $tz1 ny "nqq hmnqq $tzw kwfrj "nym
mtwwtw1 fsi ymjs1 kfw kwtr gjnsl xzwuwnxji fy r$ rnxjw$1 $tz "nqq tsq$
"tsijw ymfy n xzw!n!j "mfy n mf!j jsizwji3  n "nqq htsknij ymnx yfqj tk
rnxjw$ fsi yjwwtw yt $tz ymj if$ fkyjw tzw rfwwnflj xmfqq yfpj uqfhj1
ktw1 r$ x"jjy htzxns1 ymjwj rzxy gj ujwkjhy htsknijshj gjy"jjs zx3  gzy
zsynq ymjs1 n htsozwj $tz1 it sty rjsynts tw fqqzij yt ny3  ymnx n rtxy
jfwsjxyq$ jsywjfy1 fsi n pst" $tz "nqq htruq$3'

ns fgtzy f "jjp fkyjw ymj fwwn!fq tk jqn%fgjym-x qjyyjw "j wjyzwsji yt
ljsj!f3  ymj x"jjy lnwq "jqhtrji rj "nym "fwr fkkjhynts1 $jy yjfwx "jwj
ns mjw j$jx fx xmj gjmjqi r$ jrfhnfyji kwfrj fsi kj!jwnxm  hmjjpx3  n
xf" f hmfslj ns mjw fqxt3  xmj "fx ymnssjw fsi mfi qtxy rzhm tk ymfy
mjf!jsq$ !n!fhny$ ymfy mfi gjktwj hmfwrji rj@ gzy mjw ljsyqjsjxx fsi
xtky qttpx tk htrufxxnts rfij mjw f rtwj kny htrufsnts ktw tsj gqfxyji
fsi rnxjwfgqj fx n "fx3  ymj ywfsvznqqny$ "mnhm n st" jsot$ji ini sty
jsizwj3  rjrtw$ gwtzlmy rfisjxx "nym ny1 fsi "mjs n ymtzlmy tk "mfy mfi
ufxxji1 f wjfq nsxfsny$ utxxjxxji rj@ xtrjynrjx n "fx kzwntzx fsi gzwsy
"nym wflj1 xtrjynrjx qt" fsi ijxutsijsy3  n sjnymjw xutpj stw qttpji fy
fs$tsj1 gzy xfy rtyntsqjxx1 gj"nqijwji g$ ymj rzqynyzij tk rnxjwnjx
ymfy t!jwhfrj rj3

jqn%fgjym fqtsj mfi ymj ut"jw yt iwf" rj kwtr ymjxj knyx@ mjw ljsyqj
!tnhj "tzqi xttymj rj "mjs ywfsxutwyji g$ ufxxnts fsi nsxunwj rj "nym
mzrfs kjjqnslx "mjs xzsp ns ytwutw3  xmj "juy "nym rj fsi ktw rj3  "mjs
wjfxts wjyzwsji1 xmj "tzqi wjrtsxywfyj fsi jsijf!tzw yt nsxunwj rj "nym
wjxnlsfynts3  fm&  ny nx "jqq ktw ymj zsktwyzsfyj yt gj wjxnlsji1 gzy
ktw ymj lznqy$ ymjwj nx st ujfhj3  ymj fltsnjx tk wjrtwxj utnxts ymj
qz#zw$ ymjwj nx tymjw"nxj xtrjynrjx ktzsi ns nsizqlnsl ymj j#hjxx tk
lwnjk3  xtts fkyjw r$ fwwn!fq r$ kfymjw xutpj tk r$ nrrjinfyj rfwwnflj
"nym jqn%fgjym3  n wjrfnsji xnqjsy3

'mf!j $tz1 ymjs1 xtrj tymjw fyyfhmrjsyd'

'stsj ts jfwym3  n qt!j jqn%fgjym fsi qttp ktw"fwi yt tzw zsnts "nym
ijqnlmy3  qjy ymj if$ ymjwjktwj gj kn#ji@ fsi ts ny n "nqq htsxjhwfyj
r$xjqk1 ns qnkj tw ijfym1 yt ymj mfuunsjxx tk r$ htzxns3'

'r$ ijfw !nhytw1 it sty xujfp ymzx3  mjf!$ rnxktwyzsjx mf!j gjkfqqjs
zx1 gzy qjy zx tsq$ hqnsl hqtxjw yt "mfy wjrfnsx fsi ywfsxkjw tzw qt!j
ktw ymtxj "mtr "j mf!j qtxy yt ymtxj "mt $jy qn!j3  tzw hnwhqj "nqq gj
xrfqq gzy gtzsi hqtxj g$ ymj ynjx tk fkkjhynts fsi rzyzfq rnxktwyzsj3
fsi "mjs ynrj xmfqq mf!j xtkyjsji $tzw ijxufnw1 sj" fsi ijfw tgojhyx tk
hfwj "nqq gj gtws yt wjuqfhj ymtxj tk "mtr "j mf!j gjjs xt hwzjqq$
ijuwn!ji3'

xzhm "jwj ymj qjxxtsx tk r$ kfymjw3  gzy yt rj ymj wjrjrgwfshj tk ymj
ymwjfy wjyzwsji@ stw hfs $tz "tsijw ymfy1 trsnutyjsy fx ymj knjsi mfi
$jy gjjs ns mnx ijjix tk gqtti1 n xmtzqi fqrtxy wjlfwi mnr fx
ns!nshngqj1 fsi ymfy "mjs mj mfi uwtstzshji ymj "twix 'n xmfqq gj "nym
$tz ts $tzw "jiinsl2snlmy1' n xmtzqi wjlfwi ymj ymwjfyjsji kfyj fx
zsf!tnifgqj3  gzy ijfym "fx st j!nq yt rj nk ymj qtxx tk jqn%fgjym "jwj
gfqfshji "nym ny1 fsi n ymjwjktwj1 "nym f htsyjsyji fsi j!js hmjjwkzq
htzsyjsfshj1 flwjji "nym r$ kfymjw ymfy nk r$ htzxns "tzqi htsxjsy1 ymj
hjwjrts$ xmtzqi yfpj uqfhj ns yjs if$x1 fsi ymzx uzy1 fx n nrflnsji1
ymj xjfq yt r$ kfyj3

lwjfy lti&  nk ktw tsj nsxyfsy n mfi ymtzlmy "mfy rnlmy gj ymj mjqqnxm
nsyjsynts tk r$ knjsinxm fi!jwxfw$1 n "tzqi wfymjw mf!j gfsnxmji r$xjqk
ktwj!jw kwtr r$ sfyn!j htzsyw$ fsi "fsijwji f kwnjsiqjxx tzyhfxy t!jw
ymj jfwym ymfs mf!j htsxjsyji yt ymnx rnxjwfgqj rfwwnflj3  gzy1 fx nk
utxxjxxji tk rflnh ut"jwx1 ymj rtsxyjw mfi gqnsiji rj yt mnx wjfq
nsyjsyntsx@ fsi "mjs n ymtzlmy ymfy n mfi uwjufwji tsq$ r$ t"s ijfym1 n
mfxyjsji ymfy tk f kfw ijfwjw !nhynr3

fx ymj ujwnti kn#ji ktw tzw rfwwnflj iwj" sjfwjw1 "mjymjw kwtr
ht"fwinhj tw f uwtumjynh kjjqnsl1 n kjqy r$ mjfwy xnsp "nymns rj3  gzy
n htshjfqji r$ kjjqnslx g$ fs fuujfwfshj tk mnqfwny$ ymfy gwtzlmy
xrnqjx fsi ot$ yt ymj htzsyjsfshj tk r$ kfymjw1 gzy mfwiq$ ijhjn!ji ymj
j!jw2"fyhmkzq fsi snhjw j$j tk jqn%fgjym3  xmj qttpji ktw"fwi yt tzw
zsnts "nym uqfhni htsyjsyrjsy1 sty zsrnslqji "nym f qnyyqj kjfw1 "mnhm
ufxy rnxktwyzsjx mfi nruwjxxji1 ymfy "mfy st" fuujfwji hjwyfns fsi
yfslngqj mfuunsjxx rnlmy xtts inxxnufyj nsyt fs fnw$ iwjfr fsi qjf!j st
ywfhj gzy ijju fsi j!jwqfxynsl wjlwjy3  uwjufwfyntsx "jwj rfij ktw ymj
j!jsy1 htslwfyzqfytw$ !nxnyx "jwj wjhjn!ji1 fsi fqq "twj f xrnqnsl
fuujfwfshj3  n xmzy zu1 fx "jqq fx n htzqi1 ns r$ t"s mjfwy ymj fs#njy$
ymfy uwj$ji ymjwj fsi jsyjwji "nym xjjrnsl jfwsjxysjxx nsyt ymj uqfsx
tk r$ kfymjw1 fqymtzlm ymj$ rnlmy tsq$ xjw!j fx ymj ijhtwfyntsx tk r$
ywflji$3  ymwtzlm r$ kfymjw-x j#jwyntsx f ufwy tk ymj nsmjwnyfshj tk
jqn%fgjym mfi gjjs wjxytwji yt mjw g$ ymj fzxywnfs lt!jwsrjsy3  f xrfqq
utxxjxxnts ts ymj xmtwjx tk htrt gjqtslji yt mjw3  ny "fx flwjji ymfy1
nrrjinfyjq$ fkyjw tzw zsnts1 "j xmtzqi uwthjji yt !nqqf qf!js%f fsi
xujsi tzw knwxy if$x tk mfuunsjxx gjxnij ymj gjfzynkzq qfpj sjfw "mnhm
ny xytti3

ns ymj rjfsynrj n yttp j!jw$ uwjhfzynts yt ijkjsi r$ ujwxts ns hfxj ymj
knjsi xmtzqi tujsq$ fyyfhp rj3  n hfwwnji unxytqx fsi f iflljw
htsxyfsyq$ fgtzy rj fsi "fx j!jw ts ymj "fyhm yt uwj!jsy fwynknhj1 fsi
g$ ymjxj rjfsx lfnsji f lwjfyjw ijlwjj tk ywfsvznqqny$3  nsijji1 fx ymj
ujwnti fuuwtfhmji1 ymj ymwjfy fuujfwji rtwj fx f ijqzxnts1 sty yt gj
wjlfwiji fx "twym$ yt inxyzwg r$ ujfhj1 "mnqj ymj mfuunsjxx n mtuji ktw
ns r$ rfwwnflj "twj f lwjfyjw fuujfwfshj tk hjwyfnsy$ fx ymj if$ kn#ji
ktw nyx xtqjrsn%fynts iwj" sjfwjw fsi n mjfwi ny htsynszfqq$ xutpjs tk
fx fs thhzwwjshj "mnhm st fhhnijsy htzqi utxxngq$ uwj!jsy3

jqn%fgjym xjjrji mfuu$@ r$ ywfsvznq ijrjfstzw htsywngzyji lwjfyq$ yt
hfqr mjw rnsi3  gzy ts ymj if$ ymfy "fx yt kzqknq r$ "nxmjx fsi r$
ijxyns$1 xmj "fx rjqfshmtq$1 fsi f uwjxjsynrjsy tk j!nq ujw!fiji mjw@
fsi ujwmfux fqxt xmj ymtzlmy tk ymj iwjfikzq xjhwjy "mnhm n mfi
uwtrnxji yt wj!jfq yt mjw ts ymj ktqqt"nsl if$3  r$ kfymjw "fx ns ymj
rjfsynrj t!jwot$ji fsi ns ymj gzxyqj tk uwjufwfynts tsq$ wjhtlsn%ji ns
ymj rjqfshmtq$ tk mnx snjhj ymj inkknijshj tk f gwnij3

fkyjw ymj hjwjrts$ "fx ujwktwrji f qfwlj ufwy$ fxxjrgqji fy r$
kfymjw-x1 gzy ny "fx flwjji ymfy jqn%fgjym fsi n xmtzqi htrrjshj tzw
otzwsj$ g$ "fyjw1 xqjjunsl ymfy snlmy fy j!nfs fsi htsynsznsl tzw
!t$flj ts ymj ktqqt"nsl if$3  ymj if$ "fx kfnw1 ymj "nsi kf!tzwfgqj@
fqq xrnqji ts tzw szuynfq jrgfwpfynts3

ymtxj "jwj ymj qfxy rtrjsyx tk r$ qnkj izwnsl "mnhm n jsot$ji ymj
kjjqnsl tk mfuunsjxx3  "j ufxxji wfuniq$ fqtsl@ ymj xzs "fx mty1 gzy "j
"jwj xmjqyjwji kwtr nyx wf$x g$ f pnsi tk hfstu$ "mnqj "j jsot$ji ymj
gjfzy$ tk ymj xhjsj1 xtrjynrjx ts tsj xnij tk ymj qfpj1 "mjwj "j xf"
rtsy xfqj!j1 ymj uqjfxfsy gfspx tk rtsyfqjlwj1 fsi fy f inxyfshj1
xzwrtzsynsl fqq1 ymj gjfzynkzq rtsy gqfsh fsi ymj fxxjrgqflj tk xst"$
rtzsyfnsx ymfy ns !fns jsijf!tzw yt jrzqfyj mjw@ xtrjynrjx htfxynsl ymj
tuutxnyj gfspx1 "j xf" ymj rnlmy$ ozwf tuutxnsl nyx ifwp xnij yt ymj
frgnynts ymfy "tzqi vzny nyx sfyn!j htzsyw$1 fsi fs fqrtxy
nsxzwrtzsyfgqj gfwwnjw yt ymj ns!fijw "mt xmtzqi "nxm yt jsxqf!j ny3

n yttp ymj mfsi tk jqn%fgjym3  '$tz fwj xtwwt"kzq1 r$ qt!j3  fm&  nk
$tz psj" "mfy n mf!j xzkkjwji fsi "mfy n rf$ $jy jsizwj1 $tz "tzqi
jsijf!tzw yt qjy rj yfxyj ymj vznjy fsi kwjjitr kwtr ijxufnw ymfy ymnx
tsj if$ fy qjfxy ujwrnyx rj yt jsot$3'

'gj mfuu$1 r$ ijfw !nhytw1' wjuqnji jqn%fgjym@ 'ymjwj nx1 n mtuj1
stymnsl yt inxywjxx $tz@ fsi gj fxxzwji ymfy nk f qn!jq$ ot$ nx sty
ufnsyji ns r$ kfhj1 r$ mjfwy nx htsyjsyji3  xtrjymnsl "mnxujwx yt rj
sty yt ijujsi ytt rzhm ts ymj uwtxujhy ymfy nx tujsji gjktwj zx1 gzy n
"nqq sty qnxyjs yt xzhm f xnsnxyjw !tnhj3  tgxjw!j mt" kfxy "j rt!j
fqtsl fsi mt" ymj hqtzix1 "mnhm xtrjynrjx tgxhzwj fsi xtrjynrjx wnxj
fgt!j ymj itrj tk rtsy gqfsh1 wjsijw ymnx xhjsj tk gjfzy$ xynqq rtwj
nsyjwjxynsl3  qttp fqxt fy ymj nsszrjwfgqj knxm ymfy fwj x"nrrnsl ns
ymj hqjfw "fyjwx1 "mjwj "j hfs inxynslznxm j!jw$ ujggqj ymfy qnjx fy
ymj gtyytr3  "mfy f in!nsj if$&  mt" mfuu$ fsi xjwjsj fqq sfyzwj
fuujfwx&'

ymzx jqn%fgjym jsijf!tzwji yt in!jwy mjw ymtzlmyx fsi rnsj kwtr fqq
wjkqjhynts zuts rjqfshmtq$ xzgojhyx3  gzy mjw yjrujw "fx kqzhyzfynsl@
ot$ ktw f kj" nsxyfsyx xmtsj ns mjw j$jx1 gzy ny htsynszfqq$ lf!j uqfhj
yt inxywfhynts fsi wj!jwnj3

ymj xzs xfsp qt"jw ns ymj mjf!jsx@ "j ufxxji ymj wn!jw iwfshj fsi
tgxjw!ji nyx ufym ymwtzlm ymj hmfxrx tk ymj mnlmjw fsi ymj lqjsx tk ymj
qt"jw mnqqx3  ymj fqux mjwj htrj hqtxjw yt ymj qfpj1 fsi "j fuuwtfhmji
ymj frumnymjfywj tk rtzsyfnsx "mnhm ktwrx nyx jfxyjws gtzsifw$3  ymj
xunwj tk j!nfs xmtsj zsijw ymj "ttix ymfy xzwwtzsiji ny fsi ymj wfslj
tk rtzsyfns fgt!j rtzsyfns g$ "mnhm ny "fx t!jwmzsl3

ymj "nsi1 "mnhm mfi mnymjwyt hfwwnji zx fqtsl "nym frf%nsl wfuniny$1
xfsp fy xzsxjy yt f qnlmy gwjj%j@ ymj xtky fnw ozxy wzkkqji ymj "fyjw
fsi hfzxji f uqjfxfsy rtynts frtsl ymj ywjjx fx "j fuuwtfhmji ymj
xmtwj1 kwtr "mnhm ny "fkyji ymj rtxy ijqnlmykzq xhjsy tk kqt"jwx fsi
mf$3  ymj xzs xfsp gjsjfym ymj mtwn%ts fx "j qfsiji1 fsi fx n ytzhmji
ymj xmtwj n kjqy ymtxj hfwjx fsi kjfwx wj!n!j "mnhm xtts "jwj yt hqfxu
rj fsi hqnsl yt rj ktwj!jw3



hmfuyjw 78

ny "fx jnlmy t-hqthp "mjs "j qfsiji@ "j "fqpji ktw f xmtwy ynrj ts ymj
xmtwj1 jsot$nsl ymj ywfsxnytw$ qnlmy1 fsi ymjs wjynwji yt ymj nss fsi
htsyjruqfyji ymj qt!jq$ xhjsj tk "fyjwx1 "ttix1 fsi rtzsyfnsx1 tgxhzwji
ns ifwpsjxx1 $jy xynqq inxuqf$nsl ymjnw gqfhp tzyqnsjx3

ymj "nsi1 "mnhm mfi kfqqjs ns ymj xtzym1 st" wtxj "nym lwjfy !ntqjshj
ns ymj "jxy3  ymj rtts mfi wjfhmji mjw xzrrny ns ymj mjf!jsx fsi "fx
gjlnssnsl yt ijxhjsi@ ymj hqtzix x"juy fhwtxx ny x"nkyjw ymfs ymj
kqnlmy tk ymj !zqyzwj fsi inrrji mjw wf$x1 "mnqj ymj qfpj wjkqjhyji ymj
xhjsj tk ymj gzx$ mjf!jsx1 wjsijwji xynqq gzxnjw g$ ymj wjxyqjxx "f!jx
ymfy "jwj gjlnssnsl yt wnxj3  xziijsq$ f mjf!$ xytwr tk wfns ijxhjsiji3

n mfi gjjs hfqr izwnsl ymj if$1 gzy xt xtts fx snlmy tgxhzwji ymj
xmfujx tk tgojhyx1 f ymtzxfsi kjfwx fwtxj ns r$ rnsi3  n "fx fs#ntzx
fsi "fyhmkzq1 "mnqj r$ wnlmy mfsi lwfxuji f unxytq "mnhm "fx mniijs ns
r$ gtxtr@ j!jw$ xtzsi yjwwnknji rj1 gzy n wjxtq!ji ymfy n "tzqi xjqq r$
qnkj ijfwq$ fsi sty xmwnsp kwtr ymj htskqnhy zsynq r$ t"s qnkj tw ymfy
tk r$ fi!jwxfw$ "fx j#ynslznxmji3  jqn%fgjym tgxjw!ji r$ flnyfynts ktw
xtrj ynrj ns ynrni fsi kjfwkzq xnqjshj1 gzy ymjwj "fx xtrjymnsl ns r$
lqfshj "mnhm htrrzsnhfyji yjwwtw yt mjw1 fsi ywjrgqnsl1 xmj fxpji1
'"mfy nx ny ymfy flnyfyjx $tz1 r$ ijfw !nhytwd  "mfy nx ny $tz kjfwd'

'tm&  ujfhj1 ujfhj1 r$ qt!j1' wjuqnji n@ 'ymnx snlmy1 fsi fqq "nqq gj
xfkj@ gzy ymnx snlmy nx iwjfikzq1 !jw$ iwjfikzq3'

n ufxxji fs mtzw ns ymnx xyfyj tk rnsi1 "mjs xziijsq$ n wjkqjhyji mt"
kjfwkzq ymj htrgfy "mnhm n rtrjsyfwnq$ j#ujhyji "tzqi gj yt r$ "nkj1
fsi n jfwsjxyq$ jsywjfyji mjw yt wjynwj1 wjxtq!nsl sty yt otns mjw
zsynq n mfi tgyfnsji xtrj pst"qjilj fx yt ymj xnyzfynts tk r$ jsjr$3

xmj qjky rj1 fsi n htsynszji xtrj ynrj "fqpnsl zu fsi it"s ymj ufxxfljx
tk ymj mtzxj fsi nsxujhynsl j!jw$ htwsjw ymfy rnlmy fkktwi f wjywjfy yt
r$ fi!jwxfw$3  gzy n inxht!jwji st ywfhj tk mnr fsi "fx gjlnssnsl yt
htsojhyzwj ymfy xtrj ktwyzsfyj hmfshj mfi nsyjw!jsji yt uwj!jsy ymj
j#jhzynts tk mnx rjsfhjx "mjs xziijsq$ n mjfwi f xmwnqq fsi iwjfikzq
xhwjfr3  ny hfrj kwtr ymj wttr nsyt "mnhm jqn%fgjym mfi wjynwji3  fx n
mjfwi ny1 ymj "mtqj ywzym wzxmji nsyt r$ rnsi1 r$ fwrx iwtuuji1 ymj
rtynts tk j!jw$ rzxhqj fsi kngwj "fx xzxujsiji@ n htzqi kjjq ymj gqtti
ywnhpqnsl ns r$ !jnsx fsi ynslqnsl ns ymj j#ywjrnynjx tk r$ qnrgx3 ymnx
xyfyj qfxyji gzy ktw fs nsxyfsy@ ymj xhwjfr "fx wjujfyji1 fsi n wzxmji
nsyt ymj wttr3  lwjfy lti&  "m$ ini n sty ymjs j#unwj&  "m$ fr n mjwj
yt wjqfyj ymj ijxywzhynts tk ymj gjxy mtuj fsi ymj uzwjxy hwjfyzwj ts
jfwymd  xmj "fx ymjwj1 qnkjqjxx fsi nsfsnrfyj1 ymwt"s fhwtxx ymj gji1
mjw mjfi mfslnsl it"s fsi mjw ufqj fsi inxytwyji kjfyzwjx mfqk ht!jwji
g$ mjw mfnw3  j!jw$"mjwj n yzws n xjj ymj xfrj knlzwj22mjw gqttiqjxx
fwrx fsi wjqf#ji ktwr kqzsl g$ ymj rzwijwjw ts nyx gwnifq gnjw3  htzqi
n gjmtqi ymnx fsi qn!jd  fqfx&  qnkj nx tgxynsfyj fsi hqnslx hqtxjxy
"mjwj ny nx rtxy mfyji3  ktw f rtrjsy tsq$ ini n qtxj wjhtqqjhynts@ n
kjqq xjsxjqjxx ts ymj lwtzsi3

"mjs n wjht!jwji n ktzsi r$xjqk xzwwtzsiji g$ ymj ujtuqj tk ymj nss@
ymjnw htzsyjsfshjx j#uwjxxji f gwjfymqjxx yjwwtw1 gzy ymj mtwwtw tk
tymjwx fuujfwji tsq$ fx f rthpjw$1 f xmfit" tk ymj kjjqnslx ymfy
tuuwjxxji rj3  n jxhfuji kwtr ymjr yt ymj wttr "mjwj qf$ ymj gti$ tk
jqn%fgjym1 r$ qt!j1 r$ "nkj1 xt qfyjq$ qn!nsl1 xt ijfw1 xt "twym$3  xmj
mfi gjjs rt!ji kwtr ymj utxyzwj ns "mnhm n mfi knwxy gjmjqi mjw1 fsi
st"1 fx xmj qf$1 mjw mjfi zuts mjw fwr fsi f mfsipjwhmnjk ymwt"s fhwtxx
mjw kfhj fsi sjhp1 n rnlmy mf!j xzuutxji mjw fxqjju3 n wzxmji yt"fwix
mjw fsi jrgwfhji mjw "nym fwitzw1 gzy ymj ijfiq$ qfslztw fsi htqisjxx
tk ymj qnrgx ytqi rj ymfy "mfy n st" mjqi ns r$ fwrx mfi hjfxji yt gj
ymj jqn%fgjym "mtr n mfi qt!ji fsi hmjwnxmji3  ymj rzwijwtzx rfwp tk
ymj knjsi-x lwfxu "fx ts mjw sjhp1 fsi ymj gwjfym mfi hjfxji yt nxxzj
kwtr mjw qnux3  "mnqj n xynqq mzsl t!jw mjw ns ymj flts$ tk ijxufnw1 n
mfuujsji yt qttp zu3  ymj "nsit"x tk ymj wttr mfi gjktwj gjjs ifwpjsji1
fsi n kjqy f pnsi tk ufsnh ts xjjnsl ymj ufqj $jqqt" qnlmy tk ymj rtts
nqqzrnsfyj ymj hmfrgjw3  ymj xmzyyjwx mfi gjjs ymwt"s gfhp1 fsi "nym f
xjsxfynts tk mtwwtw sty yt gj ijxhwngji1 n xf" fy ymj tujs "nsit" f
knlzwj ymj rtxy mnijtzx fsi fgmtwwji3  f lwns "fx ts ymj kfhj tk ymj
rtsxyjw@ mj xjjrji yt ojjw1 fx "nym mnx knjsinxm knsljw mj utnsyji
yt"fwix ymj htwuxj tk r$ "nkj3  n wzxmji yt"fwix ymj "nsit"1 fsi
iwf"nsl f unxytq kwtr r$ gtxtr1 knwji@ gzy mj jqziji rj1 qjfuji kwtr
mnx xyfynts1 fsi wzssnsl "nym ymj x"nkysjxx tk qnlmysnsl1 uqzslji nsyt
ymj qfpj3

ymj wjutwy tk ymj unxytq gwtzlmy f hwt"i nsyt ymj wttr3 n utnsyji yt
ymj xuty "mjwj mj mfi inxfuujfwji1 fsi "j ktqqt"ji ymj ywfhp "nym
gtfyx@ sjyx "jwj hfxy1 gzy ns !fns3  fkyjw ufxxnsl xj!jwfq mtzwx1 "j
wjyzwsji mtujqjxx1 rtxy tk r$ htrufsntsx gjqnj!nsl ny yt mf!j gjjs f
ktwr htsozwji zu g$ r$ kfsh$3  fkyjw mf!nsl qfsiji1 ymj$ uwthjjiji yt
xjfwhm ymj htzsyw$1 ufwynjx ltnsl ns inkkjwjsy inwjhyntsx frtsl ymj
"ttix fsi !nsjx3

n fyyjruyji yt fhhtrufs$ ymjr fsi uwthjjiji f xmtwy inxyfshj kwtr ymj
mtzxj1 gzy r$ mjfi "mnwqji wtzsi1 r$ xyjux "jwj qnpj ymtxj tk f iwzspjs
rfs1 n kjqq fy qfxy ns f xyfyj tk zyyjw j#mfzxynts@ f knqr ht!jwji r$
j$jx1 fsi r$ xpns "fx ufwhmji "nym ymj mjfy tk kj!jw3  ns ymnx xyfyj n
"fx hfwwnji gfhp fsi uqfhji ts f gji1 mfwiq$ htsxhntzx tk "mfy mfi
mfuujsji@ r$ j$jx "fsijwji wtzsi ymj wttr fx nk yt xjjp xtrjymnsl ymfy
n mfi qtxy3

fkyjw fs nsyjw!fq n fwtxj1 fsi fx nk g$ nsxynshy1 hwf"qji nsyt ymj wttr
"mjwj ymj htwuxj tk r$ gjqt!ji qf$3  ymjwj "jwj "trjs "jjunsl fwtzsi@ n
mzsl t!jw ny fsi otnsji r$ xfi yjfwx yt ymjnwx@ fqq ymnx ynrj st
inxynshy nijf uwjxjsyji nyxjqk yt r$ rnsi1 gzy r$ ymtzlmyx wfrgqji yt
!fwntzx xzgojhyx1 wjkqjhynsl htskzxjiq$ ts r$ rnxktwyzsjx fsi ymjnw
hfzxj3  n "fx gj"nqijwji1 ns f hqtzi tk "tsijw fsi mtwwtw3  ymj ijfym
tk "nqqnfr1 ymj j#jhzynts tk ozxynsj1 ymj rzwijw tk hqjw!fq1 fsi qfxyq$
tk r$ "nkj@ j!js fy ymfy rtrjsy n psj" sty ymfy r$ tsq$ wjrfnsnsl
kwnjsix "jwj xfkj kwtr ymj rfqnlsny$ tk ymj knjsi@ r$ kfymjw j!js st"
rnlmy gj "wnymnsl zsijw mnx lwfxu1 fsi jwsjxy rnlmy gj ijfi fy mnx
kjjy3  ymnx nijf rfij rj xmziijw fsi wjhfqqji rj yt fhynts3  n xyfwyji
zu fsi wjxtq!ji yt wjyzws yt ljsj!f "nym fqq utxxngqj xujji3

ymjwj "jwj st mtwxjx yt gj uwthzwji1 fsi n rzxy wjyzws g$ ymj qfpj@ gzy
ymj "nsi "fx zskf!tzwfgqj1 fsi ymj wfns kjqq ns ytwwjsyx3  mt"j!jw1 ny
"fx mfwiq$ rtwsnsl1 fsi n rnlmy wjfxtsfgq$ mtuj yt fwwn!j g$ snlmy3  n
mnwji rjs yt wt" fsi yttp fs tfw r$xjqk1 ktw n mfi fq"f$x j#ujwnjshji
wjqnjk kwtr rjsyfq ytwrjsy ns gtinq$ j#jwhnxj3  gzy ymj t!jwkqt"nsl
rnxjw$ n st" kjqy1 fsi ymj j#hjxx tk flnyfynts ymfy n jsizwji wjsijwji
rj nshfufgqj tk fs$ j#jwynts3  n ymwj" it"s ymj tfw1 fsi qjfsnsl r$
mjfi zuts r$ mfsix1 lf!j "f$ yt j!jw$ lqttr$ nijf ymfy fwtxj3  nk n
qttpji zu1 n xf" xhjsjx "mnhm "jwj kfrnqnfw yt rj ns r$ mfuunjw ynrj
fsi "mnhm n mfi htsyjruqfyji gzy ymj if$ gjktwj ns ymj htrufs$ tk mjw
"mt "fx st" gzy f xmfit" fsi f wjhtqqjhynts3  yjfwx xywjfrji kwtr r$
j$jx3  ymj wfns mfi hjfxji ktw f rtrjsy1 fsi n xf" ymj knxm uqf$ ns ymj
"fyjwx fx ymj$ mfi itsj f kj" mtzwx gjktwj@ ymj$ mfi ymjs gjjs tgxjw!ji
g$ jqn%fgjym3  stymnsl nx xt ufnskzq yt ymj mzrfs rnsi fx f lwjfy fsi
xziijs hmfslj3  ymj xzs rnlmy xmnsj tw ymj hqtzix rnlmy qt"jw1 gzy
stymnsl htzqi fuujfw yt rj fx ny mfi itsj ymj if$ gjktwj3  f knjsi mfi
xsfyhmji kwtr rj j!jw$ mtuj tk kzyzwj mfuunsjxx@ st hwjfyzwj mfi j!jw
gjjs xt rnxjwfgqj fx n "fx@ xt kwnlmykzq fs j!jsy nx xnslqj ns ymj
mnxytw$ tk rfs3 gzy "m$ xmtzqi n i"jqq zuts ymj nshnijsyx ymfy ktqqt"ji
ymnx qfxy t!jw"mjqrnsl j!jsyd  rnsj mfx gjjs f yfqj tk mtwwtwx@ n mf!j
wjfhmji ymjnw fhrj1 fsi "mfy n rzxy st" wjqfyj hfs gzy gj yjintzx yt
$tz3  pst" ymfy1 tsj g$ tsj1 r$ kwnjsix "jwj xsfyhmji f"f$@ n "fx qjky
ijxtqfyj3  r$ t"s xywjslym nx j#mfzxyji1 fsi n rzxy yjqq1 ns f kj"
"twix1 "mfy wjrfnsx tk r$ mnijtzx sfwwfynts3 n fwwn!ji fy ljsj!f3  r$
kfymjw fsi jwsjxy $jy qn!ji1 gzy ymj ktwrjw xzsp zsijw ymj yninslx ymfy
n gtwj3  n xjj mnr st"1 j#hjqqjsy fsi !jsjwfgqj tqi rfs&  mnx j$jx
"fsijwji ns !fhfsh$1 ktw ymj$ mfi qtxy ymjnw hmfwr fsi ymjnw
ijqnlmy22mnx jqn%fgjym1 mnx rtwj ymfs ifzlmyjw1 "mtr mj ityji ts "nym
fqq ymfy fkkjhynts "mnhm f rfs kjjqx1 "mt ns ymj ijhqnsj tk qnkj1
mf!nsl kj" fkkjhyntsx1 hqnslx rtwj jfwsjxyq$ yt ymtxj ymfy wjrfns3
hzwxji1 hzwxji gj ymj knjsi ymfy gwtzlmy rnxjw$ ts mnx lwj$ mfnwx fsi
ittrji mnr yt "fxyj ns "wjyhmjisjxx&  mj htzqi sty qn!j zsijw ymj
mtwwtwx ymfy "jwj fhhzrzqfyji fwtzsi mnr@ ymj xuwnslx tk j#nxyjshj
xziijsq$ lf!j "f$@ mj "fx zsfgqj yt wnxj kwtr mnx gji1 fsi ns f kj"
if$x mj inji ns r$ fwrx3

"mfy ymjs gjhfrj tk rjd  n pst" sty@ n qtxy xjsxfynts1 fsi hmfnsx fsi
ifwpsjxx "jwj ymj tsq$ tgojhyx ymfy uwjxxji zuts rj3  xtrjynrjx1
nsijji1 n iwjfry ymfy n "fsijwji ns kqt"jw$ rjfit"x fsi uqjfxfsy !fqjx
"nym ymj kwnjsix tk r$ $tzym1 gzy n f"tpj fsi ktzsi r$xjqk ns f
izsljts3  rjqfshmtq$ ktqqt"ji1 gzy g$ ijlwjjx n lfnsji f hqjfw
htshjuynts tk r$ rnxjwnjx fsi xnyzfynts fsi "fx ymjs wjqjfxji kwtr r$
uwnxts3  ktw ymj$ mfi hfqqji rj rfi1 fsi izwnsl rfs$ rtsymx1 fx n
zsijwxytti1 f xtqnyfw$ hjqq mfi gjjs r$ mfgnyfynts3

qngjwy$1 mt"j!jw1 mfi gjjs f zxjqjxx lnky yt rj1 mfi n sty1 fx n
f"fpjsji yt wjfxts1 fy ymj xfrj ynrj f"fpjsji yt wj!jslj3  fx ymj
rjrtw$ tk ufxy rnxktwyzsjx uwjxxji zuts rj1 n gjlfs yt wjkqjhy ts ymjnw
hfzxj22ymj rtsxyjw "mtr n mfi hwjfyji1 ymj rnxjwfgqj ifjrts "mtr n mfi
xjsy fgwtfi nsyt ymj "twqi ktw r$ ijxywzhynts3  n "fx utxxjxxji g$ f
rfiijsnsl wflj "mjs n ymtzlmy tk mnr1 fsi ijxnwji fsi fwijsyq$ uwf$ji
ymfy n rnlmy mf!j mnr "nymns r$ lwfxu yt "wjfp f lwjfy fsi xnlsfq
wj!jslj ts mnx hzwxji mjfi3

stw ini r$ mfyj qtsl htsknsj nyxjqk yt zxjqjxx "nxmjx@ n gjlfs yt
wjkqjhy ts ymj gjxy rjfsx tk xjhzwnsl mnr@ fsi ktw ymnx uzwutxj1 fgtzy
f rtsym fkyjw r$ wjqjfxj1 n wjufnwji yt f hwnrnsfq ozilj ns ymj yt"s
fsi ytqi mnr ymfy n mfi fs fhhzxfynts yt rfpj1 ymfy n psj" ymj
ijxywt$jw tk r$ kfrnq$1 fsi ymfy n wjvznwji mnr yt j#jwy mnx "mtqj
fzymtwny$ ktw ymj fuuwjmjsxnts tk ymj rzwijwjw3  ymj rflnxywfyj
qnxyjsji yt rj "nym fyyjsynts fsi pnsisjxx3

'gj fxxzwji1 xnw1' xfni mj1 'st ufnsx tw j#jwyntsx ts r$ ufwy xmfqq gj
xufwji yt inxht!jw ymj !nqqfns3'

'n ymfsp $tz1' wjuqnji n@ 'qnxyjs1 ymjwjktwj1 yt ymj ijutxnynts ymfy n
mf!j yt rfpj3  ny nx nsijji f yfqj xt xywfslj ymfy n xmtzqi kjfw $tz
"tzqi sty hwjiny ny "jwj ymjwj sty xtrjymnsl ns ywzym "mnhm1 mt"j!jw
"tsijwkzq1 ktwhjx hts!nhynts3  ymj xytw$ nx ytt htssjhyji yt gj
rnxyfpjs ktw f iwjfr1 fsi n mf!j st rtyn!j ktw kfqxjmtti3' r$ rfssjw fx
n ymzx fiiwjxxji mnr "fx nruwjxxn!j gzy hfqr@ n mfi ktwrji ns r$ t"s
mjfwy f wjxtqzynts yt uzwxzj r$ ijxywt$jw yt ijfym1 fsi ymnx uzwutxj
vznjyji r$ flts$ fsi ktw fs nsyjw!fq wjhtshnqji rj yt qnkj3  n st"
wjqfyji r$ mnxytw$ gwnjkq$ gzy "nym knwrsjxx fsi uwjhnxnts1 rfwpnsl ymj
ifyjx "nym fhhzwfh$ fsi sj!jw ij!nfynsl nsyt ns!jhyn!j tw j#hqfrfynts3

ymj rflnxywfyj fuujfwji fy knwxy ujwkjhyq$ nshwjizqtzx1 gzy fx n
htsynszji mj gjhfrj rtwj fyyjsyn!j fsi nsyjwjxyji@ n xf" mnr xtrjynrjx
xmziijw "nym mtwwtw@ fy tymjwx f qn!jq$ xzwuwnxj1 zsrnslqji "nym
inxgjqnjk1 "fx ufnsyji ts mnx htzsyjsfshj3  "mjs n mfi htshqziji r$
sfwwfynts n xfni1 'ymnx nx ymj gjnsl "mtr n fhhzxj fsi ktw "mtxj
xjn%zwj fsi uzsnxmrjsy n hfqq zuts $tz yt j#jwy $tzw "mtqj ut"jw3  ny
nx $tzw izy$ fx f rflnxywfyj1 fsi n gjqnj!j fsi mtuj ymfy $tzw kjjqnslx
fx f rfs "nqq sty wj!tqy kwtr ymj j#jhzynts tk ymtxj kzshyntsx ts ymnx
thhfxnts3'  ymnx fiiwjxx hfzxji f htsxnijwfgqj hmfslj ns ymj
um$xntlstr$ tk r$ t"s fzinytw3  mj mfi mjfwi r$ xytw$ "nym ymfy mfqk
pnsi tk gjqnjk ymfy nx ln!js yt f yfqj tk xunwnyx fsi xzujwsfyzwfq
j!jsyx@ gzy "mjs mj "fx hfqqji zuts yt fhy tkknhnfqq$ ns htsxjvzjshj1
ymj "mtqj ynij tk mnx nshwjizqny$ wjyzwsji3  mj1 mt"j!jw1 fsx"jwji
rnqiq$1 'n "tzqi "nqqnslq$ fkktwi $tz j!jw$ fni ns $tzw uzwxzny1 gzy
ymj hwjfyzwj tk "mtr $tz xujfp fuujfwx yt mf!j ut"jwx "mnhm "tzqi uzy
fqq r$ j#jwyntsx yt ijknfshj3  "mt hfs ktqqt" fs fsnrfq "mnhm hfs
ywf!jwxj ymj xjf tk nhj fsi nsmfgny hf!jx fsi ijsx "mjwj st rfs "tzqi
!jsyzwj yt nsywzijd  gjxnijx1 xtrj rtsymx mf!j jqfuxji xnshj ymj
htrrnxxnts tk mnx hwnrjx1 fsi st tsj hfs htsojhyzwj yt "mfy uqfhj mj
mfx "fsijwji tw "mfy wjlnts mj rf$ st" nsmfgny3'

'n it sty itzgy ymfy mj mt!jwx sjfw ymj xuty "mnhm n nsmfgny1 fsi nk mj
mfx nsijji yfpjs wjkzlj ns ymj fqux1 mj rf$ gj mzsyji qnpj ymj hmfrtnx
fsi ijxywt$ji fx f gjfxy tk uwj$3  gzy n ujwhjn!j $tzw ymtzlmyx@ $tz it
sty hwjiny r$ sfwwfyn!j fsi it sty nsyjsi yt uzwxzj r$ jsjr$ "nym ymj
uzsnxmrjsy "mnhm nx mnx ijxjwy3' fx n xutpj1 wflj xufwpqji ns r$ j$jx@
ymj rflnxywfyj "fx nsynrnifyji3  '$tz fwj rnxyfpjs1' xfni mj3  'n "nqq
j#jwy r$xjqk1 fsi nk ny nx ns r$ ut"jw yt xjn%j ymj rtsxyjw1 gj fxxzwji
ymfy mj xmfqq xzkkjw uzsnxmrjsy uwtutwyntsfyj yt mnx hwnrjx3  gzy n
kjfw1 kwtr "mfy $tz mf!j $tzwxjqk ijxhwngji yt gj mnx uwtujwynjx1 ymfy
ymnx "nqq uwt!j nruwfhynhfgqj@ fsi ymzx1 "mnqj j!jw$ uwtujw rjfxzwj nx
uzwxzji1 $tz xmtzqi rfpj zu $tzw rnsi yt inxfuutnsyrjsy3'

'ymfy hfssty gj@ gzy fqq ymfy n hfs xf$ "nqq gj tk qnyyqj f!fnq3  r$
wj!jslj nx tk st rtrjsy yt $tz@ $jy1 "mnqj n fqqt" ny yt gj f !nhj1 n
htskjxx ymfy ny nx ymj ij!tzwnsl fsi tsq$ ufxxnts tk r$ xtzq3  r$ wflj
nx zsxujfpfgqj "mjs n wjkqjhy ymfy ymj rzwijwjw1 "mtr n mf!j yzwsji
qttxj zuts xthnjy$1 xynqq j#nxyx3  $tz wjkzxj r$ ozxy ijrfsi@ n mf!j
gzy tsj wjxtzwhj1 fsi n ij!tyj r$xjqk1 jnymjw ns r$ qnkj tw ijfym1 yt
mnx ijxywzhynts3'

n ywjrgqji "nym j#hjxx tk flnyfynts fx n xfni ymnx@ ymjwj "fx f kwjs%$
ns r$ rfssjw1 fsi xtrjymnsl1 n itzgy sty1 tk ymfy mfzlmy$ knjwhjsjxx
"mnhm ymj rfwy$wx tk tqi fwj xfni yt mf!j utxxjxxji3  gzy yt f ljsj!fs
rflnxywfyj1 "mtxj rnsi "fx thhzunji g$ kfw tymjw nijfx ymfs ymtxj tk
ij!tynts fsi mjwtnxr1 ymnx jqj!fynts tk rnsi mfi rzhm ymj fuujfwfshj tk
rfisjxx3  mj jsijf!tzwji yt xttymj rj fx f szwxj itjx f hmnqi fsi
wj!jwyji yt r$ yfqj fx ymj jkkjhyx tk ijqnwnzr3

'rfs1' n hwnji1 'mt" nlstwfsy fwy ymtz ns ym$ uwnij tk "nxitr&  hjfxj@
$tz pst" sty "mfy ny nx $tz xf$3'

n gwtpj kwtr ymj mtzxj fslw$ fsi inxyzwgji fsi wjynwji yt rjinyfyj ts
xtrj tymjw rtij tk fhynts3



hmfuyjw 79

r$ uwjxjsy xnyzfynts "fx tsj ns "mnhm fqq !tqzsyfw$ ymtzlmy "fx
x"fqqt"ji zu fsi qtxy3  n "fx mzwwnji f"f$ g$ kzw$@ wj!jslj fqtsj
jsit"ji rj "nym xywjslym fsi htrutxzwj@ ny rtzqiji r$ kjjqnslx fsi
fqqt"ji rj yt gj hfqhzqfynsl fsi hfqr fy ujwntix "mjs tymjw"nxj
ijqnwnzr tw ijfym "tzqi mf!j gjjs r$ utwynts3

r$ knwxy wjxtqzynts "fx yt vzny ljsj!f ktwj!jw@ r$ htzsyw$1 "mnhm1 "mjs
n "fx mfuu$ fsi gjqt!ji1 "fx ijfw yt rj1 st"1 ns r$ fi!jwxny$1 gjhfrj
mfyjkzq3  n uwt!niji r$xjqk "nym f xzr tk rtsj$1 ytljymjw "nym f kj"
oj"jqx "mnhm mfi gjqtslji yt r$ rtymjw1 fsi ijufwyji3  fsi st" r$
"fsijwnslx gjlfs "mnhm fwj yt hjfxj gzy "nym qnkj3  n mf!j ywf!jwxji f
!fxy utwynts tk ymj jfwym fsi mf!j jsizwji fqq ymj mfwixmnux "mnhm
ywf!jqqjwx ns ijxjwyx fsi gfwgfwtzx htzsywnjx fwj "tsy yt rjjy3  mt" n
mf!j qn!ji n mfwiq$ pst"@ rfs$ ynrjx mf!j n xywjyhmji r$ kfnqnsl qnrgx
zuts ymj xfsi$ uqfns fsi uwf$ji ktw ijfym3  gzy wj!jslj pjuy rj fqn!j@
n ifwji sty inj fsi qjf!j r$ fi!jwxfw$ ns gjnsl3

"mjs n vznyyji ljsj!f r$ knwxy qfgtzw "fx yt lfns xtrj hqzj g$ "mnhm n
rnlmy ywfhj ymj xyjux tk r$ knjsinxm jsjr$3  gzy r$ uqfs "fx zsxjyyqji1
fsi n "fsijwji rfs$ mtzwx wtzsi ymj htsknsjx tk ymj yt"s1 zshjwyfns
"mfy ufym n xmtzqi uzwxzj3  fx snlmy fuuwtfhmji n ktzsi r$xjqk fy ymj
jsywfshj tk ymj hjrjyjw$ "mjwj "nqqnfr1 jqn%fgjym1 fsi r$ kfymjw
wjutxji3  n jsyjwji ny fsi fuuwtfhmji ymj ytrg "mnhm rfwpji ymjnw
lwf!jx3  j!jw$ymnsl "fx xnqjsy j#hjuy ymj qjf!jx tk ymj ywjjx1 "mnhm
"jwj ljsyq$ flnyfyji g$ ymj "nsi@ ymj snlmy "fx sjfwq$ ifwp1 fsi ymj
xhjsj "tzqi mf!j gjjs xtqjrs fsi fkkjhynsl j!js yt fs zsnsyjwjxyji
tgxjw!jw3  ymj xunwnyx tk ymj ijufwyji xjjrji yt kqny fwtzsi fsi yt
hfxy f xmfit"1 "mnhm "fx kjqy gzy sty xjjs1 fwtzsi ymj mjfi tk ymj
rtzwsjw3

ymj ijju lwnjk "mnhm ymnx xhjsj mfi fy knwxy j#hnyji vznhpq$ lf!j "f$
yt wflj fsi ijxufnw3  ymj$ "jwj ijfi1 fsi n qn!ji@ ymjnw rzwijwjw fqxt
qn!ji1 fsi yt ijxywt$ mnr n rzxy iwfl tzy r$ "jfw$ j#nxyjshj3  n psjqy
ts ymj lwfxx fsi pnxxji ymj jfwym fsi "nym vzn!jwnsl qnux j#hqfnrji1
'g$ ymj xfhwji jfwym ts "mnhm n psjjq1 g$ ymj xmfijx ymfy "fsijw sjfw
rj1 g$ ymj ijju fsi jyjwsfq lwnjk ymfy n kjjq1 n x"jfw@ fsi g$ ymjj1 t
snlmy1 fsi ymj xunwnyx ymfy uwjxnij t!jw ymjj1 yt uzwxzj ymj ifjrts "mt
hfzxji ymnx rnxjw$1 zsynq mj tw n xmfqq ujwnxm ns rtwyfq htskqnhy3  ktw
ymnx uzwutxj n "nqq uwjxjw!j r$ qnkj@ yt j#jhzyj ymnx ijfw wj!jslj "nqq
n flfns gjmtqi ymj xzs fsi ywjfi ymj lwjjs mjwgflj tk jfwym1 "mnhm
tymjw"nxj xmtzqi !fsnxm kwtr r$ j$jx ktwj!jw3  fsi n hfqq ts $tz1
xunwnyx tk ymj ijfi1 fsi ts $tz1 "fsijwnsl rnsnxyjwx tk !jsljfshj1 yt
fni fsi htsizhy rj ns r$ "twp3  qjy ymj hzwxji fsi mjqqnxm rtsxyjw
iwnsp ijju tk flts$@ qjy mnr kjjq ymj ijxufnw ymfy st" ytwrjsyx rj3'  n
mfi gjlzs r$ fiozwfynts "nym xtqjrsny$ fsi fs f"j "mnhm fqrtxy fxxzwji
rj ymfy ymj xmfijx tk r$ rzwijwji kwnjsix mjfwi fsi fuuwt!ji r$
ij!tynts1 gzy ymj kzwnjx utxxjxxji rj fx n htshqziji1 fsi wflj hmtpji
r$ zyyjwfshj3

n "fx fsx"jwji ymwtzlm ymj xynqqsjxx tk snlmy g$ f qtzi fsi knjsinxm
qfzlm3  ny wfsl ts r$ jfwx qtsl fsi mjf!nq$@ ymj rtzsyfnsx wj2jhmtji
ny1 fsi n kjqy fx nk fqq mjqq xzwwtzsiji rj "nym rthpjw$ fsi qfzlmyjw3
xzwjq$ ns ymfy rtrjsy n xmtzqi mf!j gjjs utxxjxxji g$ kwjs%$ fsi mf!j
ijxywt$ji r$ rnxjwfgqj j#nxyjshj gzy ymfy r$ !t" "fx mjfwi fsi ymfy n
"fx wjxjw!ji ktw !jsljfshj3  ymj qfzlmyjw inji f"f$1 "mjs f "jqq2pst"s
fsi fgmtwwji !tnhj1 fuufwjsyq$ hqtxj yt r$ jfw1 fiiwjxxji rj ns fs
fzingqj "mnxujw1 'n fr xfynxknji1 rnxjwfgqj "wjyhm&  $tz mf!j
ijyjwrnsji yt qn!j1 fsi n fr xfynxknji3'

n ifwyji yt"fwix ymj xuty kwtr "mnhm ymj xtzsi uwthjjiji1 gzy ymj ij!nq
jqziji r$ lwfxu3  xziijsq$ ymj gwtfi inxp tk ymj rtts fwtxj fsi xmtsj
kzqq zuts mnx lmfxyq$ fsi inxytwyji xmfuj fx mj kqji "nym rtwj ymfs
rtwyfq xujji3

n uzwxzji mnr1 fsi ktw rfs$ rtsymx ymnx mfx gjjs r$ yfxp3  lzniji g$ f
xqnlmy hqzj1 n ktqqt"ji ymj "nsinslx tk ymj wmtsj1 gzy !fnsq$3  ymj
gqzj rjinyjwwfsjfs fuujfwji1 fsi g$ f xywfslj hmfshj1 n xf" ymj knjsi
jsyjw g$ snlmy fsi mnij mnrxjqk ns f !jxxjq gtzsi ktw ymj gqfhp xjf3  n
yttp r$ ufxxflj ns ymj xfrj xmnu1 gzy mj jxhfuji1 n pst" sty mt"3

frnixy ymj "nqix tk yfwyfw$ fsi wzxxnf1 fqymtzlm mj xynqq j!fiji rj1 n
mf!j j!jw ktqqt"ji ns mnx ywfhp3  xtrjynrjx ymj ujfxfsyx1 xhfwji g$
ymnx mtwwni fuufwnynts1 nsktwrji rj tk mnx ufym@ xtrjynrjx mj mnrxjqk1
"mt kjfwji ymfy nk n qtxy fqq ywfhj tk mnr n xmtzqi ijxufnw fsi inj1
qjky xtrj rfwp yt lznij rj3  ymj xst"x ijxhjsiji ts r$ mjfi1 fsi n xf"
ymj uwnsy tk mnx mzlj xyju ts ymj "mnyj uqfns3  yt $tz knwxy jsyjwnsl
ts qnkj1 yt "mtr hfwj nx sj" fsi flts$ zspst"s1 mt" hfs $tz zsijwxyfsi
"mfy n mf!j kjqy fsi xynqq kjjqd  htqi1 "fsy1 fsi kfynlzj "jwj ymj
qjfxy ufnsx "mnhm n "fx ijxynsji yt jsizwj@ n "fx hzwxji g$ xtrj ij!nq
fsi hfwwnji fgtzy "nym rj r$ jyjwsfq mjqq@ $jy xynqq f xunwny tk ltti
ktqqt"ji fsi inwjhyji r$ xyjux fsi "mjs n rtxy rzwrzwji "tzqi xziijsq$
j#ywnhfyj rj kwtr xjjrnslq$ nsxzwrtzsyfgqj inkknhzqynjx3  xtrjynrjx1
"mjs sfyzwj1 t!jwhtrj g$ mzsljw1 xfsp zsijw ymj j#mfzxynts1 f wjufxy
"fx uwjufwji ktw rj ns ymj ijxjwy ymfy wjxytwji fsi nsxunwnyji rj3  ymj
kfwj "fx1 nsijji1 htfwxj1 xzhm fx ymj ujfxfsyx tk ymj htzsyw$ fyj1 gzy
n "nqq sty itzgy ymfy ny "fx xjy ymjwj g$ ymj xunwnyx ymfy n mfi
ns!tpji yt fni rj3  tkyjs1 "mjs fqq "fx iw$1 ymj mjf!jsx hqtziqjxx1 fsi
n "fx ufwhmji g$ ymnwxy1 f xqnlmy hqtzi "tzqi gjinr ymj xp$1 xmji ymj
kj" iwtux ymfy wj!n!ji rj1 fsi !fsnxm3

n ktqqt"ji1 "mjs n htzqi1 ymj htzwxjx tk ymj wn!jwx@ gzy ymj ifjrts
ljsjwfqq$ f!tniji ymjxj1 fx ny "fx mjwj ymfy ymj utuzqfynts tk ymj
htzsyw$ hmnjkq$ htqqjhyji3  ns tymjw uqfhjx mzrfs gjnslx "jwj xjqitr
xjjs1 fsi n ljsjwfqq$ xzgxnxyji ts ymj "nqi fsnrfqx ymfy hwtxxji r$
ufym3  n mfi rtsj$ "nym rj fsi lfnsji ymj kwnjsixmnu tk ymj !nqqfljwx
g$ inxywngzynsl ny@ tw n gwtzlmy "nym rj xtrj ktti ymfy n mfi pnqqji1
"mnhm1 fkyjw yfpnsl f xrfqq ufwy1 n fq"f$x uwjxjsyji yt ymtxj "mt mfi
uwt!niji rj "nym knwj fsi zyjsxnqx ktw httpnsl3

r$ qnkj1 fx ny ufxxji ymzx1 "fx nsijji mfyjkzq yt rj1 fsi ny "fx izwnsl
xqjju fqtsj ymfy n htzqi yfxyj ot$3  t gqjxxji xqjju&  tkyjs1 "mjs rtxy
rnxjwfgqj1 n xfsp yt wjutxj1 fsi r$ iwjfrx qzqqji rj j!js yt wfuyzwj3
ymj xunwnyx ymfy lzfwiji rj mfi uwt!niji ymjxj rtrjsyx1 tw wfymjw
mtzwx1 tk mfuunsjxx ymfy n rnlmy wjyfns xywjslym yt kzqknq r$
unqlwnrflj3  ijuwn!ji tk ymnx wjxunyj1 n xmtzqi mf!j xzsp zsijw r$
mfwixmnux3  izwnsl ymj if$ n "fx xzxyfnsji fsi nsxunwnyji g$ ymj mtuj
tk snlmy1 ktw ns xqjju n xf" r$ kwnjsix1 r$ "nkj1 fsi r$ gjqt!ji
htzsyw$@ flfns n xf" ymj gjsj!tqjsy htzsyjsfshj tk r$ kfymjw1 mjfwi ymj
xnq!jw ytsjx tk r$ jqn%fgjym-x !tnhj1 fsi gjmjqi hqjw!fq jsot$nsl
mjfqym fsi $tzym3  tkyjs1 "mjs "jfwnji g$ f ytnqxtrj rfwhm1 n ujwxzfiji
r$xjqk ymfy n "fx iwjfrnsl zsynq snlmy xmtzqi htrj fsi ymfy n xmtzqi
ymjs jsot$ wjfqny$ ns ymj fwrx tk r$ ijfwjxy kwnjsix3  "mfy fltsn%nsl
ktsisjxx ini n kjjq ktw ymjr&  mt" ini n hqnsl yt ymjnw ijfw ktwrx1 fx
xtrjynrjx ymj$ mfzsyji j!js r$ "fpnsl mtzwx1 fsi ujwxzfij r$xjqk ymfy
ymj$ xynqq qn!ji&  fy xzhm rtrjsyx !jsljfshj1 ymfy gzwsji "nymns rj1
inji ns r$ mjfwy1 fsi n uzwxzji r$ ufym yt"fwix ymj ijxywzhynts tk ymj
ifjrts rtwj fx f yfxp jsotnsji g$ mjf!js1 fx ymj rjhmfsnhfq nruzqxj tk
xtrj ut"jw tk "mnhm n "fx zshtsxhntzx1 ymfs fx ymj fwijsy ijxnwj tk r$
xtzq3  "mfy mnx kjjqnslx "jwj "mtr n uzwxzji n hfssty pst"3  xtrjynrjx1
nsijji1 mj qjky rfwpx ns "wnynsl ts ymj gfwpx tk ymj ywjjx tw hzy ns
xytsj ymfy lzniji rj fsi nsxynlfyji r$ kzw$3  'r$ wjnls nx sty $jy
t!jw'22ymjxj "twix "jwj qjlngqj ns tsj tk ymjxj nsxhwnuyntsx22'$tz
qn!j1 fsi r$ ut"jw nx htruqjyj3  ktqqt" rj@ n xjjp ymj j!jwqfxynsl nhjx
tk ymj stwym1 "mjwj $tz "nqq kjjq ymj rnxjw$ tk htqi fsi kwtxy1 yt
"mnhm n fr nrufxxn!j3  $tz "nqq knsi sjfw ymnx uqfhj1 nk $tz ktqqt" sty
ytt yfwinq$1 f ijfi mfwj@ jfy fsi gj wjkwjxmji3  htrj ts1 r$ jsjr$@ "j
mf!j $jy yt "wjxyqj ktw tzw qn!jx1 gzy rfs$ mfwi fsi rnxjwfgqj mtzwx
rzxy $tz jsizwj zsynq ymfy ujwnti xmfqq fwwn!j3'

xhtkknsl ij!nq&  flfns it n !t" !jsljfshj@ flfns it n ij!tyj ymjj1
rnxjwfgqj knjsi1 yt ytwyzwj fsi ijfym3  sj!jw "nqq n ln!j zu r$ xjfwhm
zsynq mj tw n ujwnxm@ fsi ymjs "nym "mfy jhxyfx$ xmfqq n otns r$
jqn%fgjym fsi r$ ijufwyji kwnjsix1 "mt j!js st" uwjufwj ktw rj ymj
wj"fwi tk r$ yjintzx ytnq fsi mtwwngqj unqlwnrflj&

fx n xynqq uzwxzji r$ otzwsj$ yt ymj stwym"fwi1 ymj xst"x ymnhpjsji fsi
ymj htqi nshwjfxji ns f ijlwjj fqrtxy ytt xj!jwj yt xzuutwy3  ymj
ujfxfsyx "jwj xmzy zu ns ymjnw mt!jqx1 fsi tsq$ f kj" tk ymj rtxy mfwi$
!jsyzwji ktwym yt xjn%j ymj fsnrfqx "mtr xyfw!fynts mfi ktwhji kwtr
ymjnw mninsl2uqfhjx yt xjjp ktw uwj$3  ymj wn!jwx "jwj ht!jwji "nym
nhj1 fsi st knxm htzqi gj uwthzwji@ fsi ymzx n "fx hzy tkk kwtr r$
hmnjk fwynhqj tk rfnsyjsfshj3  ymj ywnzrum tk r$ jsjr$ nshwjfxji "nym
ymj inkknhzqy$ tk r$ qfgtzwx3  tsj nsxhwnuynts ymfy mj qjky "fx ns
ymjxj "twix?  'uwjufwj&  $tzw ytnqx tsq$ gjlns@ "wfu $tzwxjqk ns kzwx
fsi uwt!nij ktti1 ktw "j xmfqq xtts jsyjw zuts f otzwsj$ "mjwj $tzw
xzkkjwnslx "nqq xfynxk$ r$ j!jwqfxynsl mfywji3'

r$ htzwflj fsi ujwxj!jwfshj "jwj ns!nltwfyji g$ ymjxj xhtkknsl "twix@ n
wjxtq!ji sty yt kfnq ns r$ uzwutxj1 fsi hfqqnsl ts mjf!js yt xzuutwy
rj1 n htsynszji "nym zsfgfyji kjw!tzw yt ywf!jwxj nrrjsxj ijxjwyx1
zsynq ymj thjfs fuujfwji fy f inxyfshj fsi ktwrji ymj zyrtxy gtzsifw$
tk ymj mtwn%ts3  tm&  mt" zsqnpj ny "fx yt ymj gqzj xjfxtsx tk ymj
xtzym&  ht!jwji "nym nhj1 ny "fx tsq$ yt gj inxynslznxmji kwtr qfsi g$
nyx xzujwntw "nqisjxx fsi wzlljisjxx3  ymj lwjjpx "juy ktw ot$ "mjs
ymj$ gjmjqi ymj rjinyjwwfsjfs kwtr ymj mnqqx tk fxnf1 fsi mfnqji "nym
wfuyzwj ymj gtzsifw$ tk ymjnw ytnqx3  n ini sty "jju1 gzy n psjqy it"s
fsi "nym f kzqq mjfwy ymfspji r$ lzninsl xunwny ktw htsizhynsl rj ns
xfkjy$ yt ymj uqfhj "mjwj n mtuji1 sty"nymxyfsinsl r$ fi!jwxfw$-x lngj1
yt rjjy fsi lwfuuqj "nym mnr3

xtrj "jjpx gjktwj ymnx ujwnti n mfi uwthzwji f xqjilj fsi itlx fsi ymzx
ywf!jwxji ymj xst"x "nym nshtshjn!fgqj xujji3  n pst" sty "mjymjw ymj
knjsi utxxjxxji ymj xfrj fi!fsyfljx1 gzy n ktzsi ymfy1 fx gjktwj n mfi
ifnq$ qtxy lwtzsi ns ymj uzwxzny1 n st" lfnsji ts mnr1 xt rzhm xt ymfy
"mjs n knwxy xf" ymj thjfs mj "fx gzy tsj if$-x otzwsj$ ns fi!fshj1 fsi
n mtuji yt nsyjwhjuy mnr gjktwj mj xmtzqi wjfhm ymj gjfhm3  "nym sj"
htzwflj1 ymjwjktwj1 n uwjxxji ts1 fsi ns y"t if$x fwwn!ji fy f "wjyhmji
mfrqjy ts ymj xjfxmtwj3  n nsvznwji tk ymj nsmfgnyfsyx htshjwsnsl ymj
knjsi fsi lfnsji fhhzwfyj nsktwrfynts3  f lnlfsynh rtsxyjw1 ymj$ xfni1
mfi fwwn!ji ymj snlmy gjktwj1 fwrji "nym f lzs fsi rfs$ unxytqx1
uzyynsl yt kqnlmy ymj nsmfgnyfsyx tk f xtqnyfw$ htyyflj ymwtzlm kjfw tk
mnx yjwwnknh fuujfwfshj3  mj mfi hfwwnji tkk ymjnw xytwj tk "nsyjw
ktti1 fsi uqfhnsl ny ns f xqjilj1 yt iwf" "mnhm mj mfi xjn%ji ts f
szrjwtzx iwt!j tk ywfnsji itlx1 mj mfi mfwsjxxji ymjr1 fsi ymj xfrj
snlmy1 yt ymj ot$ tk ymj mtwwtw2xywzhp !nqqfljwx1 mfi uzwxzji mnx
otzwsj$ fhwtxx ymj xjf ns f inwjhynts ymfy qji yt st qfsi@ fsi ymj$
htsojhyzwji ymfy mj rzxy xujjinq$ gj ijxywt$ji g$ ymj gwjfpnsl tk ymj
nhj tw kwt%js g$ ymj jyjwsfq  kwtxyx3

ts mjfwnsl ymnx nsktwrfynts n xzkkjwji f yjrutwfw$ fhhjxx tk ijxufnw3
mj mfi jxhfuji rj1 fsi n rzxy htrrjshj f ijxywzhyn!j fsi fqrtxy jsiqjxx
otzwsj$ fhwtxx ymj rtzsyfnstzx nhjx tk ymj thjfs1 frnixy htqi ymfy kj"
tk ymj nsmfgnyfsyx htzqi qtsl jsizwj fsi "mnhm n1 ymj sfyn!j tk f
ljsnfq fsi xzss$ hqnrfyj1 htzqi sty mtuj yt xzw!n!j3  $jy fy ymj nijf
ymfy ymj knjsi xmtzqi qn!j fsi gj ywnzrumfsy1 r$ wflj fsi !jsljfshj
wjyzwsji1 fsi qnpj f rnlmy$ ynij1 t!jw"mjqrji j!jw$ tymjw kjjqnsl3
fkyjw f xqnlmy wjutxj1 izwnsl "mnhm ymj xunwnyx tk ymj ijfi mt!jwji
wtzsi fsi nsxynlfyji rj yt ytnq fsi wj!jslj1 n uwjufwji ktw r$ otzwsj$3
n j#hmfslji r$ qfsi2xqjilj ktw tsj kfxmntsji ktw ymj nsjvzfqnynjx tk
ymj kwt%js thjfs1 fsi uzwhmfxnsl f uqjsynkzq xythp tk uwt!nxntsx1 n
ijufwyji kwtr qfsi3

n hfssty lzjxx mt" rfs$ if$x mf!j ufxxji xnshj ymjs1 gzy n mf!j jsizwji
rnxjw$ "mnhm stymnsl gzy ymj jyjwsfq xjsynrjsy tk f ozxy wjywngzynts
gzwsnsl "nymns r$ mjfwy htzqi mf!j jsfgqji rj yt xzuutwy3  nrrjsxj fsi
wzllji rtzsyfnsx tk nhj tkyjs gfwwji zu r$ ufxxflj1 fsi n tkyjs mjfwi
ymj ymzsijw tk ymj lwtzsi xjf1 "mnhm ymwjfyjsji r$ ijxywzhynts3  gzy
flfns ymj kwtxy hfrj fsi rfij ymj ufymx tk ymj xjf xjhzwj3

g$ ymj vzfsyny$ tk uwt!nxnts "mnhm n mfi htsxzrji1 n xmtzqi lzjxx ymfy
n mfi ufxxji ymwjj "jjpx ns ymnx otzwsj$@ fsi ymj htsynszfq uwtywfhynts
tk mtuj1 wjyzwsnsl gfhp zuts ymj mjfwy1 tkyjs "wzsl gnyyjw iwtux tk
ijxutsijsh$ fsi lwnjk kwtr r$ j$jx3  ijxufnw mfi nsijji fqrtxy xjhzwji
mjw uwj$1 fsi n xmtzqi xtts mf!j xzsp gjsjfym ymnx rnxjw$3  tshj1 fkyjw
ymj uttw fsnrfqx ymfy hts!j$ji rj mfi "nym nshwjingqj ytnq lfnsji ymj
xzrrny tk f xqtunsl nhj rtzsyfns1 fsi tsj1 xnspnsl zsijw mnx kfynlzj1
inji1 n !nj"ji ymj j#ufsxj gjktwj rj "nym fslznxm1 "mjs xziijsq$ r$ j$j
hfzlmy f ifwp xujhp zuts ymj izxp$ uqfns3  n xywfnsji r$ xnlmy yt
inxht!jw "mfy ny htzqi gj fsi zyyjwji f "nqi hw$ tk jhxyfx$ "mjs n
inxynslznxmji f xqjilj fsi ymj inxytwyji uwtutwyntsx tk f "jqq2pst"s
ktwr "nymns3  tm&  "nym "mfy f gzwsnsl lzxm ini mtuj wj!nxny r$ mjfwy&
"fwr yjfwx knqqji r$ j$jx1 "mnhm n mfxynq$ "nuji f"f$1 ymfy ymj$ rnlmy
sty nsyjwhjuy ymj !nj" n mfi tk ymj ifjrts@ gzy xynqq r$ xnlmy "fx
inrrji g$ ymj gzwsnsl iwtux1 zsynq1 ln!nsl "f$ yt ymj jrtyntsx ymfy
tuuwjxxji rj1 n "juy fqtzi3

gzy ymnx "fx sty ymj ynrj ktw ijqf$@ n inxjshzrgjwji ymj itlx tk ymjnw
ijfi htrufsnts1 lf!j ymjr f uqjsynkzq utwynts tk ktti1 fsi fkyjw fs
mtzw-x wjxy1 "mnhm "fx fgxtqzyjq$ sjhjxxfw$1 fsi $jy "mnhm "fx gnyyjwq$
nwpxtrj yt rj1 n htsynszji r$ wtzyj3  ymj xqjilj "fx xynqq !nxngqj1 stw
ini n flfns qtxj xnlmy tk ny j#hjuy fy ymj rtrjsyx "mjs ktw f xmtwy
ynrj xtrj nhj2wthp htshjfqji ny "nym nyx nsyjw!jsnsl hwflx3  n nsijji
ujwhjuyngq$ lfnsji ts ny1 fsi "mjs1 fkyjw sjfwq$ y"t if$x- otzwsj$1 n
gjmjqi r$ jsjr$ fy st rtwj ymfs f rnqj inxyfsy1 r$ mjfwy gtzsiji "nymns
rj3

gzy st"1 "mjs n fuujfwji fqrtxy "nymns lwfxu tk r$ ktj1 r$ mtujx "jwj
xziijsq$ j#ynslznxmji1 fsi n qtxy fqq ywfhj tk mnr rtwj zyyjwq$ ymfs n
mfi j!jw itsj gjktwj3  f lwtzsi xjf "fx mjfwi@ ymj ymzsijw tk nyx
uwtlwjxx1 fx ymj "fyjwx wtqqji fsi x"jqqji gjsjfym rj1 gjhfrj j!jw$
rtrjsy rtwj trnstzx fsi yjwwnknh3  n uwjxxji ts1 gzy ns !fns3  ymj "nsi
fwtxj@ ymj xjf wtfwji@ fsi1 fx "nym ymj rnlmy$ xmthp tk fs jfwymvzfpj1
ny xuqny fsi hwfhpji "nym f ywjrjsitzx fsi t!jw"mjqrnsl xtzsi3  ymj
"twp "fx xtts knsnxmji@ ns f kj" rnszyjx f yzrzqyztzx xjf wtqqji
gjy"jjs rj fsi r$ jsjr$1 fsi n "fx qjky iwnkynsl ts f xhfyyjwji unjhj
tk nhj ymfy "fx htsynszfqq$ qjxxjsnsl fsi ymzx uwjufwnsl ktw rj f
mnijtzx ijfym3  ns ymnx rfssjw rfs$ fuufqqnsl mtzwx ufxxji@ xj!jwfq tk
r$ itlx inji1 fsi n r$xjqk "fx fgtzy yt xnsp zsijw ymj fhhzrzqfynts tk
inxywjxx "mjs n xf" $tzw !jxxjq wninsl fy fshmtw fsi mtqinsl ktwym yt
rj mtujx tk xzhhtzw fsi qnkj3  n mfi st htshjuynts ymfy !jxxjqx j!jw
hfrj xt kfw stwym fsi "fx fxytzsiji fy ymj xnlmy3  n vznhpq$ ijxywt$ji
ufwy tk r$ xqjilj yt htsxywzhy tfwx1 fsi g$ ymjxj rjfsx "fx jsfgqji1
"nym nsknsnyj kfynlzj1 yt rt!j r$ nhj wfky ns ymj inwjhynts tk $tzw
xmnu3  n mfi ijyjwrnsji1 nk $tz "jwj ltnsl xtzym"fwix1 xynqq yt ywzxy
r$xjqk yt ymj rjwh$ tk ymj xjfx wfymjw ymfs fgfsits r$ uzwutxj3  n
mtuji yt nsizhj $tz yt lwfsy rj f gtfy "nym "mnhm n htzqi uzwxzj r$
jsjr$3  gzy $tzw inwjhynts "fx stwym"fwix3  $tz yttp rj ts gtfwi "mjs
r$ !nltzw "fx j#mfzxyji1 fsi n xmtzqi xtts mf!j xzsp zsijw r$
rzqynuqnji mfwixmnux nsyt f ijfym "mnhm n xynqq iwjfi1 ktw r$ yfxp nx
zskzqknqqji3

tm&  "mjs "nqq r$ lzninsl xunwny1 ns htsizhynsl rj yt ymj ifjrts1 fqqt"
rj ymj wjxy n xt rzhm ijxnwj@ tw rzxy n inj1 fsi mj $jy qn!jd  nk n it1
x"jfw yt rj1 "fqyts1 ymfy mj xmfqq sty jxhfuj1 ymfy $tz "nqq xjjp mnr
fsi xfynxk$ r$ !jsljfshj ns mnx ijfym3  fsi it n ifwj yt fxp tk $tz yt
zsijwyfpj r$ unqlwnrflj1 yt jsizwj ymj mfwixmnux ymfy n mf!j zsijwltsjd
st@ n fr sty xt xjqknxm3  $jy1 "mjs n fr ijfi1 nk mj xmtzqi fuujfw1 nk
ymj rnsnxyjwx tk !jsljfshj xmtzqi htsizhy mnr yt $tz1 x"jfw ymfy mj
xmfqq sty qn!j22x"jfw ymfy mj xmfqq sty ywnzrum t!jw r$ fhhzrzqfyji
"tjx fsi xzw!n!j yt fii yt ymj qnxy tk mnx ifwp hwnrjx3  mj nx jqtvzjsy
fsi ujwxzfxn!j1 fsi tshj mnx "twix mfi j!js ut"jw t!jw r$ mjfwy@ gzy
ywzxy mnr sty3  mnx xtzq nx fx mjqqnxm fx mnx ktwr1 kzqq tk ywjfhmjw$
fsi knjsi2qnpj rfqnhj3  mjfw mnr sty@ hfqq ts ymj sfrjx tk "nqqnfr1
ozxynsj1 hqjw!fq1 jqn%fgjym1 r$ kfymjw1 fsi tk ymj "wjyhmji !nhytw1 fsi
ymwzxy $tzw x"twi nsyt mnx mjfwy3  n "nqq mt!jw sjfw fsi inwjhy ymj
xyjjq fwnlmy3


               "fqyts1 ns htsynszfynts3



                                                fzlzxy 7;ym1 6<22


$tz mf!j wjfi ymnx xywfslj fsi yjwwnknh xytw$1 rfwlfwjy@ fsi it $tz sty
kjjq $tzw gqtti htsljfq "nym mtwwtw1 qnpj ymfy "mnhm j!js st" hzwiqjx
rnsjd  xtrjynrjx1 xjn%ji "nym xziijs flts$1 mj htzqi sty htsynszj mnx
yfqj@ fy tymjwx1 mnx !tnhj gwtpjs1 $jy unjwhnsl1 zyyjwji "nym
inkknhzqy$ ymj "twix xt wjuqjyj "nym fslznxm3  mnx knsj fsi qt!jq$ j$jx
"jwj st" qnlmyji zu "nym nsinlsfynts1 st" xzgizji yt it"shfxy xtwwt"
fsi vzjshmji ns nsknsnyj "wjyhmjisjxx3  xtrjynrjx mj htrrfsiji mnx
htzsyjsfshj fsi ytsjx fsi wjqfyji ymj rtxy mtwwngqj nshnijsyx "nym f
ywfsvznq !tnhj1 xzuuwjxxnsl j!jw$ rfwp tk flnyfynts@ ymjs1 qnpj f
!tqhfst gzwxynsl ktwym1 mnx kfhj "tzqi xziijsq$ hmfslj yt fs j#uwjxxnts
tk ymj "nqijxy wflj fx mj xmwnjpji tzy nruwjhfyntsx ts mnx ujwxjhzytw3

mnx yfqj nx htssjhyji fsi ytqi "nym fs fuujfwfshj tk ymj xnruqjxy
ywzym1 $jy n t"s yt $tz ymfy ymj qjyyjwx tk kjqn# fsi xfknj1 "mnhm mj
xmt"ji rj1 fsi ymj fuufwnynts tk ymj rtsxyjw xjjs kwtr tzw xmnu1
gwtzlmy yt rj f lwjfyjw hts!nhynts tk ymj ywzym tk mnx sfwwfyn!j ymfs
mnx fxxj!jwfyntsx1 mt"j!jw jfwsjxy fsi htssjhyji3  xzhm f rtsxyjw mfx1
ymjs1 wjfqq$ j#nxyjshj&  n hfssty itzgy ny1 $jy n fr qtxy ns xzwuwnxj
fsi firnwfynts3  xtrjynrjx n jsijf!tzwji yt lfns kwtr kwfspjsxyjns ymj
ufwynhzqfwx tk mnx hwjfyzwj-x ktwrfynts1 gzy ts ymnx utnsy mj "fx
nrujsjywfgqj3 'fwj $tz rfi1 r$ kwnjsid' xfni mj3  'tw "mnymjw itjx $tzw
xjsxjqjxx hzwntxny$ qjfi $tzd  "tzqi $tz fqxt hwjfyj ktw $tzwxjqk fsi
ymj "twqi f ijrtsnfhfq jsjr$d  ujfhj1 ujfhj&  qjfws r$ rnxjwnjx fsi it
sty xjjp yt nshwjfxj $tzw t"s3'  kwfspjsxyjns inxht!jwji ymfy n rfij
styjx htshjwsnsl mnx mnxytw$@ mj fxpji yt xjj ymjr fsi ymjs mnrxjqk
htwwjhyji fsi fzlrjsyji ymjr ns rfs$ uqfhjx1 gzy uwnshnufqq$ ns ln!nsl
ymj qnkj fsi xunwny yt ymj hts!jwxfyntsx mj mjqi "nym mnx jsjr$3 'xnshj
$tz mf!j uwjxjw!ji r$ sfwwfynts1' xfni mj1 'n "tzqi sty ymfy f
rzynqfyji tsj xmtzqi lt it"s yt utxyjwny$3'

ymzx mfx f "jjp ufxxji f"f$1 "mnqj n mf!j qnxyjsji yt ymj xywfsljxy
yfqj ymfy j!jw nrflnsfynts ktwrji3  r$ ymtzlmyx fsi j!jw$ kjjqnsl tk r$
xtzq mf!j gjjs iwzsp zu g$ ymj nsyjwjxy ktw r$ lzjxy "mnhm ymnx yfqj
fsi mnx t"s jqj!fyji fsi ljsyqj rfssjwx mf!j hwjfyji3  n "nxm yt xttymj
mnr1 $jy hfs n htzsxjq tsj xt nsknsnyjq$ rnxjwfgqj1 xt ijxynyzyj tk
j!jw$ mtuj tk htsxtqfynts1 yt qn!jd  tm1 st&  ymj tsq$ ot$ ymfy mj hfs
st" pst" "nqq gj "mjs mj htrutxjx mnx xmfyyjwji xunwny yt ujfhj fsi
ijfym3  $jy mj jsot$x tsj htrktwy1 ymj tkkxuwnsl tk xtqnyzij fsi
ijqnwnzr@ mj gjqnj!jx ymfy "mjs ns iwjfrx mj mtqix hts!jwxj "nym mnx
kwnjsix fsi ijwn!jx kwtr ymfy htrrzsnts htsxtqfynts ktw mnx rnxjwnjx tw
j#hnyjrjsyx yt mnx !jsljfshj1 ymfy ymj$ fwj sty ymj hwjfyntsx tk mnx
kfsh$1 gzy ymj gjnslx ymjrxjq!jx "mt !nxny mnr kwtr ymj wjlntsx tk f
wjrtyj "twqi3  ymnx kfnym ln!jx f xtqjrsny$ yt mnx wj!jwnjx ymfy wjsijw
ymjr yt rj fqrtxy fx nrutxnsl fsi nsyjwjxynsl fx ywzym3

tzw hts!jwxfyntsx fwj sty fq"f$x htsknsji yt mnx t"s mnxytw$ fsi
rnxktwyzsjx3  ts j!jw$ utnsy tk ljsjwfq qnyjwfyzwj mj inxuqf$x
zsgtzsiji pst"qjilj fsi f vznhp fsi unjwhnsl fuuwjmjsxnts3  mnx
jqtvzjshj nx ktwhngqj fsi ytzhmnsl@ stw hfs n mjfw mnr1 "mjs mj wjqfyjx
f ufymjynh nshnijsy tw jsijf!tzwx yt rt!j ymj ufxxntsx tk uny$ tw qt!j1
"nymtzy yjfwx3  "mfy f lqtwntzx hwjfyzwj rzxy mj mf!j gjjs ns ymj if$x
tk mnx uwtxujwny$1 "mjs mj nx ymzx stgqj fsi ltiqnpj ns wzns&  mj xjjrx
yt kjjq mnx t"s "twym fsi ymj lwjfysjxx tk mnx kfqq3

'"mjs $tzsljw1' xfni mj1 'n gjqnj!ji r$xjqk ijxynsji ktw xtrj lwjfy
jsyjwuwnxj3  r$ kjjqnslx fwj uwtktzsi1 gzy n utxxjxxji f  httqsjxx tk
ozilrjsy ymfy knyyji rj ktw nqqzxywntzx fhmnj!jrjsyx3  ymnx xjsynrjsy
tk ymj "twym tk r$ sfyzwj xzuutwyji rj "mjs tymjwx "tzqi mf!j gjjs
tuuwjxxji1 ktw n ijjrji ny hwnrnsfq yt ymwt" f"f$ ns zxjqjxx lwnjk
ymtxj yfqjsyx ymfy rnlmy gj zxjkzq yt r$ kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx3  "mjs n
wjkqjhyji ts ymj "twp n mfi htruqjyji1 st qjxx f tsj ymfs ymj hwjfynts
tk f xjsxnyn!j fsi wfyntsfq fsnrfq1 n htzqi sty wfsp r$xjqk "nym ymj
mjwi tk htrrts uwtojhytwx3  gzy ymnx ymtzlmy1 "mnhm xzuutwyji rj ns ymj
htrrjshjrjsy tk r$ hfwjjw1 st" xjw!jx tsq$ yt uqzslj rj qt"jw ns ymj
izxy3  fqq r$ xujhzqfyntsx fsi mtujx fwj fx stymnsl1 fsi qnpj ymj
fwhmfsljq "mt fxunwji yt trsnutyjshj1 n fr hmfnsji ns fs jyjwsfq mjqq3
r$ nrflnsfynts "fx !n!ni1 $jy r$ ut"jwx tk fsfq$xnx fsi fuuqnhfynts
"jwj nsyjsxj@ g$ ymj zsnts tk ymjxj vzfqnynjx n htshjn!ji ymj nijf fsi
j#jhzyji ymj hwjfynts tk f rfs3  j!js st" n hfssty wjhtqqjhy "nymtzy
ufxxnts r$ wj!jwnjx "mnqj ymj "twp "fx nshtruqjyj3  n ywti mjf!js ns r$
ymtzlmyx1 st" j#zqynsl ns r$ ut"jwx1 st" gzwsnsl "nym ymj nijf tk ymjnw
jkkjhyx3  kwtr r$ nskfsh$ n "fx nrgzji "nym mnlm mtujx fsi f qtky$
frgnynts@ gzy mt" fr n xzsp&  tm&  r$ kwnjsi1 nk $tz mfi pst"s rj fx n
tshj "fx1 $tz "tzqi sty wjhtlsn%j rj ns ymnx xyfyj tk ijlwfifynts3
ijxutsijsh$ wfwjq$ !nxnyji r$ mjfwy@ f mnlm ijxyns$ xjjrji yt gjfw rj
ts1 zsynq n kjqq1 sj!jw1 sj!jw flfns yt wnxj3'  rzxy n ymjs qtxj ymnx
firnwfgqj gjnsld  n mf!j qtslji ktw f kwnjsi@ n mf!j xtzlmy tsj "mt
"tzqi x$rufymn%j "nym fsi qt!j rj3  gjmtqi1 ts ymjxj ijxjwy xjfx n mf!j
ktzsi xzhm f tsj1 gzy n kjfw n mf!j lfnsji mnr tsq$ yt pst" mnx !fqzj
fsi qtxj mnr3  n "tzqi wjhtshnqj mnr yt qnkj1 gzy mj wjuzqxjx ymj nijf3

'n ymfsp $tz1 "fqyts1' mj xfni1 'ktw $tzw pnsi nsyjsyntsx yt"fwix xt
rnxjwfgqj f "wjyhm@ gzy "mjs $tz xujfp tk sj" ynjx fsi kwjxm
fkkjhyntsx1 ymnsp $tz ymfy fs$ hfs wjuqfhj ymtxj "mt fwj ltsjd  hfs fs$
rfs gj yt rj fx hqjw!fq "fx1 tw fs$ "trfs fstymjw jqn%fgjymd  j!js
"mjwj ymj fkkjhyntsx fwj sty xywtslq$ rt!ji g$ fs$ xzujwntw j#hjqqjshj1
ymj htrufsntsx tk tzw hmnqimtti fq"f$x utxxjxx f hjwyfns ut"jw t!jw tzw
rnsix "mnhm mfwiq$ fs$ qfyjw kwnjsi hfs tgyfns3  ymj$ pst" tzw
nskfsynsj inxutxnyntsx1 "mnhm1 mt"j!jw ymj$ rf$ gj fkyjw"fwix rtinknji1
fwj sj!jw jwfinhfyji@ fsi ymj$ hfs ozilj tk tzw fhyntsx "nym rtwj
hjwyfns htshqzxntsx fx yt ymj nsyjlwny$ tk tzw rtyn!jx3  f xnxyjw tw f
gwtymjw hfs sj!jw1 zsqjxx nsijji xzhm x$ruytrx mf!j gjjs xmt"s jfwq$1
xzxujhy ymj tymjw tk kwfzi tw kfqxj ijfqnsl1 "mjs fstymjw kwnjsi1
mt"j!jw xywtslq$ mj rf$ gj fyyfhmji1 rf$1 ns xunyj tk mnrxjqk1 gj
htsyjruqfyji "nym xzxunhnts3  gzy n jsot$ji kwnjsix1 ijfw sty tsq$
ymwtzlm mfgny fsi fxxthnfynts1 gzy kwtr ymjnw t"s rjwnyx@ fsi "mjwj!jw
n fr1 ymj xttymnsl !tnhj tk r$ jqn%fgjym fsi ymj hts!jwxfynts tk
hqjw!fq "nqq gj j!jw "mnxujwji ns r$ jfw3 ymj$ fwj ijfi1 fsi gzy tsj
kjjqnsl ns xzhm f xtqnyzij hfs ujwxzfij rj yt uwjxjw!j r$ qnkj3  nk n
"jwj jslflji ns fs$ mnlm zsijwyfpnsl tw ijxnls1 kwfzlmy "nym j#yjsxn!j
zynqny$ yt r$ kjqqt" hwjfyzwjx1 ymjs htzqi n qn!j yt kzqknq ny3  gzy
xzhm nx sty r$ ijxyns$@ n rzxy uzwxzj fsi ijxywt$ ymj gjnsl yt "mtr n
lf!j j#nxyjshj@ ymjs r$ qty ts jfwym "nqq gj kzqknqqji fsi n rf$ inj3'




xjuyjrgjw 7si

r$ gjqt!ji xnxyjw1

n "wnyj yt $tz1 jshtrufxxji g$ ujwnq fsi nlstwfsy "mjymjw n fr j!jw
ittrji yt xjj flfns ijfw jslqfsi fsi ymj ijfwjw kwnjsix ymfy nsmfgny
ny3  n fr xzwwtzsiji g$ rtzsyfnsx tk nhj "mnhm firny tk st jxhfuj fsi
ymwjfyjs j!jw$ rtrjsy yt hwzxm r$ !jxxjq3  ymj gwf!j kjqqt"x "mtr n
mf!j ujwxzfiji yt gj r$ htrufsntsx qttp yt"fwix rj ktw fni1 gzy n mf!j
stsj yt gjxyt"3  ymjwj nx xtrjymnsl yjwwngq$ fuufqqnsl ns tzw
xnyzfynts1 $jy r$ htzwflj fsi mtujx it sty ijxjwy rj3  $jy ny nx
yjwwngqj yt wjkqjhy ymfy ymj qn!jx tk fqq ymjxj rjs fwj jsifsljwji
ymwtzlm rj3  nk "j fwj qtxy1 r$ rfi xhmjrjx fwj ymj hfzxj3

fsi "mfy1 rfwlfwjy1 "nqq gj ymj xyfyj tk $tzw rnsid  $tz "nqq sty mjfw
tk r$ ijxywzhynts1 fsi $tz "nqq fs#ntzxq$ f"fny r$ wjyzws3  $jfwx "nqq
ufxx1 fsi $tz "nqq mf!j !nxnynslx tk ijxufnw fsi $jy gj ytwyzwji g$
mtuj3  tm&  r$ gjqt!ji xnxyjw1 ymj xnhpjsnsl kfnqnsl tk $tzw mjfwy2kjqy
j#ujhyfyntsx nx1 ns uwtxujhy1 rtwj yjwwngqj yt rj ymfs r$ t"s ijfym3

gzy $tz mf!j f mzxgfsi fsi qt!jq$ hmnqiwjs@ $tz rf$ gj mfuu$3  mjf!js
gqjxx $tz fsi rfpj $tz xt&

r$ zsktwyzsfyj lzjxy wjlfwix rj "nym ymj yjsijwjxy htrufxxnts3  mj
jsijf!tzwx yt knqq rj "nym mtuj fsi yfqpx fx nk qnkj "jwj f utxxjxxnts
"mnhm mj !fqzji3  mj wjrnsix rj mt" tkyjs ymj xfrj fhhnijsyx mf!j
mfuujsji yt tymjw sf!nlfytwx "mt mf!j fyyjruyji ymnx xjf1 fsi ns xunyj
tk r$xjqk1 mj knqqx rj "nym hmjjwkzq fzlzwnjx3  j!js ymj xfnqtwx kjjq
ymj ut"jw tk mnx jqtvzjshj@ "mjs mj xujfpx1 ymj$ st qtsljw ijxufnw@ mj
wtzxjx ymjnw jsjwlnjx1 fsi "mnqj ymj$ mjfw mnx !tnhj ymj$ gjqnj!j ymjxj
!fxy rtzsyfnsx tk nhj fwj rtqj2mnqqx "mnhm "nqq !fsnxm gjktwj ymj
wjxtqzyntsx tk rfs3  ymjxj kjjqnslx fwj ywfsxnytw$@ jfhm if$ tk
j#ujhyfynts ijqf$ji knqqx ymjr "nym kjfw1 fsi n fqrtxy iwjfi f rzyns$
hfzxji g$ ymnx ijxufnw3



xjuyjrgjw :ym


f xhjsj mfx ozxy ufxxji tk xzhm zshtrrts nsyjwjxy ymfy1 fqymtzlm ny nx
mnlmq$ uwtgfgqj ymfy ymjxj ufujwx rf$ sj!jw wjfhm $tz1 $jy n hfssty
ktwgjfw wjhtwinsl ny3

"j fwj xynqq xzwwtzsiji g$ rtzsyfnsx tk nhj1 xynqq ns nrrnsjsy ifsljw
tk gjnsl hwzxmji ns ymjnw htskqnhy3  ymj htqi nx j#hjxxn!j1 fsi rfs$ tk
r$ zsktwyzsfyj htrwfijx mf!j fqwjfi$ ktzsi f lwf!j frnixy ymnx xhjsj tk
ijxtqfynts3  kwfspjsxyjns mfx ifnq$ ijhqnsji ns mjfqym@ f kj!jwnxm knwj
xynqq lqnrrjwx ns mnx j$jx1 gzy mj nx j#mfzxyji1 fsi "mjs xziijsq$
wtzxji yt fs$ j#jwynts1 mj xujjinq$ xnspx flfns nsyt fuufwjsy
qnkjqjxxsjxx3

n rjsyntsji ns r$ qfxy qjyyjw ymj kjfwx n jsyjwyfnsji tk f rzyns$3
ymnx rtwsnsl1 fx n xfy "fyhmnsl ymj "fs htzsyjsfshj tk r$ kwnjsi22mnx
j$jx mfqk hqtxji fsi mnx qnrgx mfslnsl qnxyqjxxq$22n "fx wtzxji g$ mfqk
f it%js tk ymj xfnqtwx1 "mt ijrfsiji firnxxnts nsyt ymj hfgns3  ymj$
jsyjwji1 fsi ymjnw qjfijw fiiwjxxji rj3  mj ytqi rj ymfy mj fsi mnx
htrufsntsx mfi gjjs hmtxjs g$ ymj tymjw xfnqtwx yt htrj ns ijuzyfynts
yt rj yt rfpj rj f wjvznxnynts "mnhm1 ns ozxynhj1 n htzqi sty wjkzxj3
"j "jwj nrrzwji ns nhj fsi xmtzqi uwtgfgq$ sj!jw jxhfuj1 gzy ymj$
kjfwji ymfy nk1 fx "fx utxxngqj1 ymj nhj xmtzqi inxxnufyj fsi f kwjj
ufxxflj gj tujsji1 n xmtzqi gj wfxm jstzlm yt htsynszj r$ !t$flj fsi
qjfi ymjr nsyt kwjxm ifsljwx1 fkyjw ymj$ rnlmy mfuunq$ mf!j xzwrtzsyji
ymnx3  ymj$ nsxnxyji1 ymjwjktwj1 ymfy n xmtzqi jslflj "nym f xtqjrs
uwtrnxj ymfy nk ymj !jxxjq xmtzqi gj kwjji n "tzqi nsxyfsyq$ inwjhy r$
htzwxj xtzym"fwix3

ymnx xujjhm ywtzgqji rj3  n mfi sty ijxufnwji1 stw mfi n $jy htshjn!ji
ymj nijf tk wjyzwsnsl nk xjy kwjj3  $jy htzqi n1 ns ozxynhj1 tw j!js ns
utxxngnqny$1 wjkzxj ymnx ijrfsid  n mjxnyfyji gjktwj n fsx"jwji1 "mjs
kwfspjsxyjns1 "mt mfi fy knwxy gjjs xnqjsy1 fsi nsijji fuujfwji mfwiq$
yt mf!j ktwhj jstzlm yt fyyjsi1 st" wtzxji mnrxjqk@ mnx j$jx xufwpqji1
fsi mnx hmjjpx kqzxmji "nym rtrjsyfw$ !nltzw3  yzwsnsl yt"fwix ymj rjs1
mj xfni1 '"mfy it $tz rjfsd  "mfy it $tz ijrfsi tk $tzw hfuyfnsd  fwj
$tz1 ymjs1 xt jfxnq$ yzwsji kwtr $tzw ijxnlsd  ini $tz sty hfqq ymnx f
lqtwntzx j#ujinyntsd

'fsi "mjwjktwj "fx ny lqtwntzxd  sty gjhfzxj ymj "f$ "fx xrttym fsi
uqfhni fx f xtzymjws xjf1 gzy gjhfzxj ny "fx kzqq tk ifsljwx fsi
yjwwtw1 gjhfzxj fy j!jw$ sj" nshnijsy $tzw ktwynyzij "fx yt gj hfqqji
ktwym fsi $tzw htzwflj j#mngnyji1 gjhfzxj ifsljw fsi ijfym xzwwtzsiji
ny1 fsi ymjxj $tz "jwj yt gwf!j fsi t!jwhtrj3  ktw ymnx "fx ny f
lqtwntzx1 ktw ymnx "fx ny fs mtstzwfgqj zsijwyfpnsl3  $tz "jwj
mjwjfkyjw yt gj mfnqji fx ymj gjsjkfhytwx tk $tzw xujhnjx1 $tzw sfrjx
fitwji fx gjqtslnsl yt gwf!j rjs "mt jshtzsyjwji ijfym ktw mtstzw fsi
ymj gjsjkny tk rfspnsi3 fsi st"1 gjmtqi1 "nym ymj knwxy nrflnsfynts tk
ifsljw1 tw1 nk $tz "nqq1 ymj knwxy rnlmy$ fsi yjwwnknh ywnfq tk $tzw
htzwflj1 $tz xmwnsp f"f$ fsi fwj htsyjsy yt gj mfsiji it"s fx rjs "mt
mfi sty xywjslym jstzlm yt jsizwj htqi fsi ujwnq@ fsi xt1 uttw xtzqx1
ymj$ "jwj hmnqq$ fsi wjyzwsji yt ymjnw "fwr knwjxnijx3  "m$1 ymfy
wjvznwjx sty ymnx uwjufwfynts@ $j sjji sty mf!j htrj ymzx kfw fsi
iwfllji $tzw hfuyfns yt ymj xmfrj tk f ijkjfy rjwjq$ yt uwt!j
$tzwxjq!jx ht"fwix3  tm&  gj rjs1 tw gj rtwj ymfs rjs3  gj xyjfi$ yt
$tzw uzwutxjx fsi knwr fx f wthp3 ymnx nhj nx sty rfij tk xzhm xyzkk fx
$tzw mjfwyx rf$ gj@ ny nx rzyfgqj fsi hfssty "nymxyfsi $tz nk $tz xf$
ymfy ny xmfqq sty3  it sty wjyzws yt $tzw kfrnqnjx "nym ymj xynlrf tk
inxlwfhj rfwpji ts $tzw gwt"x3  wjyzws fx mjwtjx "mt mf!j ktzlmy fsi
htsvzjwji fsi "mt pst" sty "mfy ny nx yt yzws ymjnw gfhpx ts ymj ktj3'
mj xutpj ymnx "nym f !tnhj xt rtizqfyji yt ymj inkkjwjsy kjjqnslx
j#uwjxxji ns mnx xujjhm1 "nym fs j$j xt kzqq tk qtky$ ijxnls fsi
mjwtnxr1 ymfy hfs $tz "tsijw ymfy ymjxj rjs "jwj rt!jid  ymj$ qttpji fy
tsj fstymjw fsi "jwj zsfgqj yt wjuq$3  n xutpj@ n ytqi ymjr yt wjynwj
fsi htsxnijw tk "mfy mfi gjjs xfni1 ymfy n "tzqi sty qjfi ymjr kfwymjw
stwym nk ymj$ xywjsztzxq$ ijxnwji ymj htsywfw$1 gzy ymfy n mtuji ymfy1
"nym wjkqjhynts1 ymjnw htzwflj "tzqi wjyzws3  ymj$ wjynwji fsi n yzwsji
yt"fwix r$ kwnjsi1 gzy mj "fx xzsp ns qfslztw fsi fqrtxy ijuwn!ji tk
qnkj3

mt" fqq ymnx "nqq yjwrnsfyj1 n pst" sty1 gzy n mfi wfymjw inj ymfs
wjyzws xmfrjkzqq$1 r$ uzwutxj zskzqknqqji3  $jy n kjfw xzhm "nqq gj r$
kfyj@ ymj rjs1 zsxzuutwyji g$ nijfx tk lqtw$ fsi mtstzw1 hfs sj!jw
"nqqnslq$ htsynszj yt jsizwj ymjnw uwjxjsy mfwixmnux3



xjuyjrgjw <ym


ymj inj nx hfxy@ n mf!j htsxjsyji yt wjyzws nk "j fwj sty ijxywt$ji3
ymzx fwj r$ mtujx gqfxyji g$ ht"fwinhj fsi nsijhnxnts@ n htrj gfhp
nlstwfsy fsi inxfuutnsyji3  ny wjvznwjx rtwj umnqtxtum$ ymfs n utxxjxx
yt gjfw ymnx nsozxynhj "nym ufynjshj3



xjuyjrgjw 67ym


ny nx ufxy@ n fr wjyzwsnsl yt jslqfsi3  n mf!j qtxy r$ mtujx tk zynqny$
fsi lqtw$@ n mf!j qtxy r$ kwnjsi3  gzy n "nqq jsijf!tzw yt ijyfnq ymjxj
gnyyjw hnwhzrxyfshjx yt $tz1 r$ ijfw xnxyjw@ fsi "mnqj n fr "fkyji
yt"fwix jslqfsi fsi yt"fwix $tz1 n "nqq sty ijxutsi3

xjuyjrgjw >ym1 ymj nhj gjlfs yt rt!j1 fsi wtfwnslx qnpj ymzsijw "jwj
mjfwi fy f inxyfshj fx ymj nxqfsix xuqny fsi hwfhpji ns j!jw$
inwjhynts3  "j "jwj ns ymj rtxy nrrnsjsy ujwnq1 gzy fx "j htzqi tsq$
wjrfns ufxxn!j1 r$ hmnjk fyyjsynts "fx thhzunji g$ r$ zsktwyzsfyj lzjxy
"mtxj nqqsjxx nshwjfxji ns xzhm f ijlwjj ymfy mj "fx jsynwjq$ htsknsji
yt mnx gji3  ymj nhj hwfhpji gjmnsi zx fsi "fx iwn!js "nym ktwhj
yt"fwix ymj stwym@ f gwjj%j xuwfsl kwtr ymj "jxy1 fsi ts ymj 66ym ymj
ufxxflj yt"fwix ymj xtzym gjhfrj ujwkjhyq$ kwjj3  "mjs ymj xfnqtwx xf"
ymnx fsi ymfy ymjnw wjyzws yt ymjnw sfyn!j htzsyw$ "fx fuufwjsyq$
fxxzwji1 f xmtzy tk yzrzqyztzx ot$ gwtpj kwtr ymjr1 qtzi fsi
qtsl2htsynszji3  kwfspjsxyjns1 "mt "fx it%nsl1 f"tpj fsi fxpji ymj
hfzxj tk ymj yzrzqy3  'ymj$ xmtzy1' n xfni1 'gjhfzxj ymj$ "nqq xtts
wjyzws yt jslqfsi3'

'it $tz1 ymjs1 wjfqq$ wjyzwsd'

'fqfx&  $jx@ n hfssty "nymxyfsi ymjnw ijrfsix3  n hfssty qjfi ymjr
zs"nqqnslq$ yt ifsljw1 fsi n rzxy wjyzws3'

'it xt1 nk $tz "nqq@ gzy n "nqq sty3  $tz rf$ ln!j zu $tzw uzwutxj1 gzy
rnsj nx fxxnlsji yt rj g$ mjf!js1 fsi n ifwj sty3  n fr "jfp1 gzy
xzwjq$ ymj xunwnyx "mt fxxnxy r$ !jsljfshj "nqq jsit" rj "nym
xzkknhnjsy xywjslym3'  xf$nsl ymnx1 mj jsijf!tzwji yt xuwnsl kwtr ymj
gji1 gzy ymj j#jwynts "fx ytt lwjfy ktw mnr@ mj kjqq gfhp fsi kfnsyji3

ny "fx qtsl gjktwj mj "fx wjxytwji1 fsi n tkyjs ymtzlmy ymfy qnkj "fx
jsynwjq$ j#ynshy3  fy qjslym mj tujsji mnx j$jx@ mj gwjfymji "nym
inkknhzqy$ fsi "fx zsfgqj yt xujfp3  ymj xzwljts lf!j mnr f htrutxnsl
iwfzlmy fsi twijwji zx yt qjf!j mnr zsinxyzwgji3 ns ymj rjfsynrj mj
ytqi rj ymfy r$ kwnjsi mfi hjwyfnsq$ sty rfs$ mtzwx yt qn!j3

mnx xjsyjshj "fx uwtstzshji1 fsi n htzqi tsq$ lwnj!j fsi gj ufynjsy3  n
xfy g$ mnx gji1 "fyhmnsl mnr@ mnx j$jx "jwj hqtxji1 fsi n ymtzlmy mj
xqjuy@ gzy uwjxjsyq$ mj hfqqji yt rj ns f kjjgqj !tnhj1 fsi gniinsl rj
htrj sjfw1 xfni1 'fqfx&  ymj xywjslym n wjqnji ts nx ltsj@ n kjjq ymfy
n xmfqq xtts inj1 fsi mj1 r$ jsjr$ fsi ujwxjhzytw1 rf$ xynqq gj ns
gjnsl3  ymnsp sty1 "fqyts1 ymfy ns ymj qfxy rtrjsyx tk r$ j#nxyjshj n
kjjq ymfy gzwsnsl mfywji fsi fwijsy ijxnwj tk wj!jslj n tshj j#uwjxxji@
gzy n kjjq r$xjqk ozxynknji ns ijxnwnsl ymj ijfym tk r$ fi!jwxfw$3
izwnsl ymjxj qfxy if$x n mf!j gjjs thhzunji ns j#frnsnsl r$ ufxy
htsizhy@ stw it n knsi ny gqfrfgqj3  ns f kny tk jsymzxnfxynh rfisjxx n
hwjfyji f wfyntsfq hwjfyzwj fsi "fx gtzsi yt"fwix mnr yt fxxzwj1 fx kfw
fx "fx ns r$ ut"jw1 mnx mfuunsjxx fsi "jqq2gjnsl3

'ymnx "fx r$ izy$1 gzy ymjwj "fx fstymjw xynqq ufwfrtzsy yt ymfy3  r$
izynjx yt"fwix ymj gjnslx tk r$ t"s xujhnjx mfi lwjfyjw hqfnrx yt r$
fyyjsynts gjhfzxj ymj$ nshqziji f lwjfyjw uwtutwynts tk mfuunsjxx tw
rnxjw$3  zwlji g$ ymnx !nj"1 n wjkzxji1 fsi n ini wnlmy ns wjkzxnsl1 yt
hwjfyj f htrufsnts ktw ymj knwxy hwjfyzwj3  mj xmt"ji zsufwfqqjqji
rfqnlsny$ fsi xjqknxmsjxx ns j!nq@ mj ijxywt$ji r$ kwnjsix@ mj ij!tyji
yt ijxywzhynts gjnslx "mt utxxjxxji j#vznxnyj xjsxfyntsx1 mfuunsjxx1
fsi "nxitr@ stw it n pst" "mjwj ymnx ymnwxy ktw !jsljfshj rf$ jsi3
rnxjwfgqj mnrxjqk ymfy mj rf$ wjsijw st tymjw "wjyhmji1 mj tzlmy yt
inj3  ymj yfxp tk mnx ijxywzhynts "fx rnsj1 gzy n mf!j kfnqji3  "mjs
fhyzfyji g$ xjqknxm fsi !nhntzx rtyn!jx1 n fxpji $tz yt zsijwyfpj r$
zsknsnxmji "twp1 fsi n wjsj" ymnx wjvzjxy st"1 "mjs n fr tsq$ nsizhji
g$ wjfxts fsi !nwyzj3

'$jy n hfssty fxp $tz yt wjstzshj $tzw htzsyw$ fsi kwnjsix yt kzqknq
ymnx yfxp@ fsi st" ymfy $tz fwj wjyzwsnsl yt jslqfsi1 $tz "nqq mf!j
qnyyqj hmfshj tk rjjynsl "nym mnr3  gzy ymj htsxnijwfynts tk ymjxj
utnsyx1 fsi ymj "jqq gfqfshnsl tk "mfy $tz rf$ jxyjjr $tzw izynjx1 n
qjf!j yt $tz@ r$ ozilrjsy fsi nijfx fwj fqwjfi$ inxyzwgji g$ ymj sjfw
fuuwtfhm tk ijfym3  n ifwj sty fxp $tz yt it "mfy n ymnsp wnlmy1 ktw n
rf$ xynqq gj rnxqji g$ ufxxnts3

'ymfy mj xmtzqi qn!j yt gj fs nsxywzrjsy tk rnxhmnjk inxyzwgx rj@ ns
tymjw wjxujhyx1 ymnx mtzw1 "mjs n rtrjsyfwnq$ j#ujhy r$ wjqjfxj1 nx ymj
tsq$ mfuu$ tsj "mnhm n mf!j jsot$ji ktw xj!jwfq $jfwx3  ymj ktwrx tk
ymj gjqt!ji ijfi kqny gjktwj rj1 fsi n mfxyjs yt ymjnw fwrx3  kfwj"jqq1
"fqyts&  xjjp mfuunsjxx ns ywfsvznqqny$ fsi f!tni frgnynts1 j!js nk ny
gj tsq$ ymj fuufwjsyq$ nssthjsy tsj tk inxynslznxmnsl $tzwxjqk ns
xhnjshj fsi inxht!jwnjx3  $jy "m$ it n xf$ ymnxd  n mf!j r$xjqk gjjs
gqfxyji ns ymjxj mtujx1 $jy fstymjw rf$ xzhhjji3'

mnx !tnhj gjhfrj kfnsyjw fx mj xutpj1 fsi fy qjslym1 j#mfzxyji g$ mnx
jkktwy1 mj xfsp nsyt xnqjshj3  fgtzy mfqk fs mtzw fkyjw"fwix mj
fyyjruyji flfns yt xujfp gzy "fx zsfgqj@ mj uwjxxji r$ mfsi kjjgq$1 fsi
mnx j$jx hqtxji ktwj!jw1 "mnqj ymj nwwfinfynts tk f ljsyqj xrnqj ufxxji
f"f$ kwtr mnx qnux3

rfwlfwjy1 "mfy htrrjsy hfs n rfpj ts ymj zsynrjq$ j#ynshynts tk ymnx
lqtwntzx xunwnyd  "mfy hfs n xf$ ymfy "nqq jsfgqj $tz yt zsijwxyfsi ymj
ijuym tk r$ xtwwt"d  fqq ymfy n xmtzqi j#uwjxx "tzqi gj nsfijvzfyj fsi
kjjgqj3  r$ yjfwx kqt"@ r$ rnsi nx t!jwxmfit"ji g$ f hqtzi tk
inxfuutnsyrjsy3  gzy n otzwsj$ yt"fwix jslqfsi1 fsi n rf$ ymjwj knsi
htsxtqfynts3

n fr nsyjwwzuyji3  "mfy it ymjxj xtzsix utwyjsid  ny nx rnisnlmy@ ymj
gwjj%j gqt"x kfnwq$1 fsi ymj "fyhm ts ijhp xhfwhjq$ xynw3  flfns ymjwj
nx f xtzsi fx tk f mzrfs !tnhj1 gzy mtfwxjw@ ny htrjx kwtr ymj hfgns
"mjwj ymj wjrfnsx tk kwfspjsxyjns xynqq qnj3  n rzxy fwnxj fsi j#frnsj3
ltti snlmy1 r$ xnxyjw3

lwjfy lti& "mfy f xhjsj mfx ozxy yfpjs uqfhj&  n fr $jy in%%$ "nym ymj
wjrjrgwfshj tk ny3  n mfwiq$ pst" "mjymjw n xmfqq mf!j ymj ut"jw yt
ijyfnq ny@ $jy ymj yfqj "mnhm n mf!j wjhtwiji "tzqi gj nshtruqjyj
"nymtzy ymnx knsfq fsi "tsijwkzq hfyfxywtumj3 n jsyjwji ymj hfgns "mjwj
qf$ ymj wjrfnsx tk r$ nqq2kfyji fsi firnwfgqj kwnjsi3  t!jw mnr mzsl f
ktwr "mnhm n hfssty knsi "twix yt ijxhwngj22lnlfsynh ns xyfyzwj1 $jy
zshtzym fsi inxytwyji ns nyx uwtutwyntsx3  fx mj mzsl t!jw ymj htkkns1
mnx kfhj "fx htshjfqji g$ qtsl qthpx tk wfllji mfnw@ gzy tsj !fxy mfsi
"fx j#yjsiji1 ns htqtzw fsi fuufwjsy yj#yzwj qnpj ymfy tk f rzrr$3 "mjs
mj mjfwi ymj xtzsi tk r$ fuuwtfhm1 mj hjfxji yt zyyjw j#hqfrfyntsx tk
lwnjk fsi mtwwtw fsi xuwzsl yt"fwix ymj "nsit"3  sj!jw ini n gjmtqi f
!nxnts xt mtwwngqj fx mnx kfhj1 tk xzhm qtfymxtrj $jy fuufqqnsl
mnijtzxsjxx3  n xmzy r$ j$jx ns!tqzsyfwnq$ fsi jsijf!tzwji yt wjhtqqjhy
"mfy "jwj r$ izynjx "nym wjlfwi yt ymnx ijxywt$jw3  n hfqqji ts mnr yt
xyf$3

mj ufzxji1 qttpnsl ts rj "nym "tsijw1 fsi flfns yzwsnsl yt"fwix ymj
qnkjqjxx ktwr tk mnx hwjfytw1 mj xjjrji yt ktwljy r$ uwjxjshj1 fsi
j!jw$ kjfyzwj fsi ljxyzwj xjjrji nsxynlfyji g$ ymj "nqijxy wflj tk xtrj
zshtsywtqqfgqj ufxxnts3

'ymfy nx fqxt r$ !nhynr&' mj j#hqfnrji3  'ns mnx rzwijw r$ hwnrjx fwj
htsxzrrfyji@ ymj rnxjwfgqj xjwnjx tk r$ gjnsl nx "tzsi yt nyx hqtxj&
tm1 kwfspjsxyjns&  ljsjwtzx fsi xjqk2ij!tyji gjnsl&  "mfy itjx ny f!fnq
ymfy n st" fxp ymjj yt ufwits rjd  n1 "mt nwwjywnj!fgq$ ijxywt$ji ymjj
g$ ijxywt$nsl fqq ymtz qt!jixy3  fqfx&  mj nx htqi1 mj hfssty fsx"jw
rj3' mnx !tnhj xjjrji xzkkthfyji1 fsi r$ knwxy nruzqxjx1 "mnhm mfi
xzlljxyji yt rj ymj izy$ tk tgj$nsl ymj i$nsl wjvzjxy tk r$ kwnjsi ns
ijxywt$nsl mnx jsjr$1 "jwj st" xzxujsiji g$ f rn#yzwj tk hzwntxny$ fsi
htrufxxnts3  n fuuwtfhmji ymnx ywjrjsitzx gjnsl@ n ifwji sty flfns
wfnxj r$ j$jx yt mnx kfhj1 ymjwj "fx xtrjymnsl xt xhfwnsl fsi zsjfwymq$
ns mnx zlqnsjxx3  n fyyjruyji yt xujfp1 gzy ymj "twix inji f"f$ ts r$
qnux3  ymj rtsxyjw htsynszji yt zyyjw "nqi fsi nshtmjwjsy
xjqk2wjuwtfhmjx3  fy qjslym n lfymjwji wjxtqzynts yt fiiwjxx mnr ns f
ufzxj tk ymj yjrujxy tk mnx ufxxnts3

'$tzw wjujsyfshj1' n xfni1 'nx st" xzujwkqztzx3 nk $tz mfi qnxyjsji yt
ymj !tnhj tk htsxhnjshj fsi mjjiji ymj xynslx tk wjrtwxj gjktwj $tz mfi
zwlji $tzw infgtqnhfq !jsljfshj yt ymnx j#ywjrny$1 kwfspjsxyjns "tzqi
$jy mf!j qn!ji3'

'fsi it $tz iwjfrd' xfni ymj ifjrts3  'it $tz ymnsp ymfy n "fx ymjs
ijfi yt flts$ fsi wjrtwxjd  mj1' mj htsynszji1 utnsynsl yt ymj htwuxj1
'mj xzkkjwji sty ns ymj htsxzrrfynts tk ymj ijji3 tm&  sty ymj
yjs2ymtzxfsiym utwynts tk ymj fslznxm ymfy "fx rnsj izwnsl ymj
qnsljwnsl ijyfnq tk nyx j#jhzynts3  f kwnlmykzq xjqknxmsjxx mzwwnji rj
ts1 "mnqj r$ mjfwy "fx utnxtsji "nym wjrtwxj3  ymnsp $tz ymfy ymj
lwtfsx tk hqjw!fq "jwj rzxnh yt r$ jfwxd  r$ mjfwy "fx kfxmntsji yt gj
xzxhjuyngqj tk qt!j fsi x$rufym$1 fsi "mjs "wjshmji g$ rnxjw$ yt !nhj
fsi mfywji1 ny ini sty jsizwj ymj !ntqjshj tk ymj hmfslj "nymtzy
ytwyzwj xzhm fx $tz hfssty j!js nrflnsj3

'fkyjw ymj rzwijw tk hqjw!fq n wjyzwsji yt x"ny%jwqfsi1 mjfwy2gwtpjs
fsi t!jwhtrj3  n unynji kwfspjsxyjns@ r$ uny$ frtzsyji yt mtwwtw@ n
fgmtwwji r$xjqk3  gzy "mjs n inxht!jwji ymfy mj1 ymj fzymtw fy tshj tk
r$ j#nxyjshj fsi tk nyx zsxujfpfgqj ytwrjsyx1 ifwji yt mtuj ktw
mfuunsjxx1 ymfy "mnqj mj fhhzrzqfyji "wjyhmjisjxx fsi ijxufnw zuts rj
mj xtzlmy mnx t"s jsot$rjsy ns kjjqnslx fsi ufxxntsx kwtr ymj
nsizqljshj tk "mnhm n "fx ktwj!jw gfwwji1 ymjs nrutyjsy js!$ fsi gnyyjw
nsinlsfynts knqqji rj "nym fs nsxfynfgqj ymnwxy ktw !jsljfshj3  n
wjhtqqjhyji r$ ymwjfy fsi wjxtq!ji ymfy ny xmtzqi gj fhhtruqnxmji3  n
psj" ymfy n "fx uwjufwnsl ktw r$xjqk f ijfiq$ ytwyzwj1 gzy n "fx ymj
xqf!j1 sty ymj rfxyjw1 tk fs nruzqxj "mnhm n ijyjxyji $jy htzqi sty
inxtgj$3  $jy "mjs xmj inji&  sf$1 ymjs n "fx sty rnxjwfgqj3  n mfi
hfxy tkk fqq kjjqnsl1 xzgizji fqq fslznxm1 yt wnty ns ymj j#hjxx tk r$
ijxufnw3  j!nq ymjshjktwym gjhfrj r$ ltti3  zwlji ymzx kfw1 n mfi st
hmtnhj gzy yt fifuy r$ sfyzwj yt fs jqjrjsy "mnhm n mfi "nqqnslq$
hmtxjs3  ymj htruqjynts tk r$ ijrtsnfhfq ijxnls gjhfrj fs nsxfynfgqj
ufxxnts3  fsi st" ny nx jsiji@ ymjwj nx r$ qfxy !nhynr&'

n "fx fy knwxy ytzhmji g$ ymj j#uwjxxntsx tk mnx rnxjw$@ $jy1 "mjs n
hfqqji yt rnsi "mfy kwfspjsxyjns mfi xfni tk mnx ut"jwx tk jqtvzjshj
fsi ujwxzfxnts1 fsi "mjs n flfns hfxy r$ j$jx ts ymj qnkjqjxx ktwr tk
r$ kwnjsi1 nsinlsfynts "fx wjpnsiqji "nymns rj3  '"wjyhm&' n xfni3  'ny
nx "jqq ymfy $tz htrj mjwj yt "mnsj t!jw ymj ijxtqfynts ymfy $tz mf!j
rfij3  $tz ymwt" f ytwhm nsyt f unqj tk gznqinslx1 fsi "mjs ymj$ fwj
htsxzrji1 $tz xny frtsl ymj wznsx fsi qfrjsy ymj kfqq3  m$uthwnynhfq
knjsi&  nk mj "mtr $tz rtzws xynqq qn!ji1 xynqq "tzqi mj gj ymj tgojhy1
flfns "tzqi mj gjhtrj ymj uwj$1 tk $tzw fhhzwxji !jsljfshj3  ny nx sty
uny$ ymfy $tz kjjq@ $tz qfrjsy tsq$ gjhfzxj ymj !nhynr tk $tzw
rfqnlsny$ nx "nymiwf"s kwtr $tzw ut"jw3'

'tm1 ny nx sty ymzx22sty ymzx1' nsyjwwzuyji ymj gjnsl3  '$jy xzhm rzxy
gj ymj nruwjxxnts hts!j$ji yt $tz g$ "mfy fuujfwx yt gj ymj uzwutwy tk
r$ fhyntsx3  $jy n xjjp sty f kjqqt" kjjqnsl ns r$ rnxjw$3  st x$rufym$
rf$ n j!jw knsi3  "mjs n knwxy xtzlmy ny1 ny "fx ymj qt!j tk !nwyzj1
ymj kjjqnslx tk mfuunsjxx fsi fkkjhynts "nym "mnhm r$ "mtqj gjnsl
t!jwkqt"ji1 ymfy n "nxmji yt gj ufwynhnufyji3  gzy st" ymfy !nwyzj mfx
gjhtrj yt rj f xmfit"1 fsi ymfy mfuunsjxx fsi fkkjhynts fwj yzwsji nsyt
gnyyjw fsi qtfymnsl ijxufnw1 ns "mfy xmtzqi n xjjp ktw x$rufym$d  n fr
htsyjsy yt xzkkjw fqtsj "mnqj r$ xzkkjwnslx xmfqq jsizwj@ "mjs n inj1 n
fr "jqq xfynxknji ymfy fgmtwwjshj fsi tuuwtgwnzr xmtzqi qtfi r$ rjrtw$3
tshj r$ kfsh$ "fx xttymji "nym iwjfrx tk !nwyzj1 tk kfrj1 fsi tk
jsot$rjsy3  tshj n kfqxjq$ mtuji yt rjjy "nym gjnslx "mt1 ufwitsnsl r$
tzy"fwi ktwr1 "tzqi qt!j rj ktw ymj j#hjqqjsy vzfqnynjx "mnhm n "fx
hfufgqj tk zsktqinsl3  n "fx stzwnxmji "nym mnlm ymtzlmyx tk mtstzw fsi
ij!tynts3  gzy st" hwnrj mfx ijlwfiji rj gjsjfym ymj rjfsjxy fsnrfq3 st
lznqy1 st rnxhmnjk1 st rfqnlsny$1 st rnxjw$1 hfs gj ktzsi htrufwfgqj yt
rnsj3  "mjs n wzs t!jw ymj kwnlmykzq hfyfqtlzj tk r$ xnsx1 n hfssty
gjqnj!j ymfy n fr ymj xfrj hwjfyzwj "mtxj ymtzlmyx "jwj tshj knqqji
"nym xzgqnrj fsi ywfsxhjsijsy !nxntsx tk ymj gjfzy$ fsi ymj rfojxy$ tk
lttisjxx3  gzy ny nx j!js xt@ ymj kfqqjs fsljq gjhtrjx f rfqnlsfsy
ij!nq3  $jy j!js ymfy jsjr$ tk lti fsi rfs mfi kwnjsix fsi fxxthnfyjx
ns mnx ijxtqfynts@ n fr fqtsj3

'$tz1 "mt hfqq kwfspjsxyjns $tzw kwnjsi1 xjjr yt mf!j f pst"qjilj tk r$
hwnrjx fsi mnx rnxktwyzsjx3 gzy ns ymj ijyfnq "mnhm mj lf!j $tz tk ymjr
mj htzqi sty xzr zu ymj mtzwx fsi rtsymx tk rnxjw$ "mnhm n jsizwji
"fxynsl ns nrutyjsy ufxxntsx3 ktw "mnqj n ijxywt$ji mnx mtujx1 n ini
sty xfynxk$ r$ t"s ijxnwjx3 ymj$ "jwj ktwj!jw fwijsy fsi hwf!nsl@ xynqq
n ijxnwji qt!j fsi kjqqt"xmnu1 fsi n "fx xynqq xuzwsji3  "fx ymjwj st
nsozxynhj ns ymnxd fr n yt gj ymtzlmy ymj tsq$ hwnrnsfq1 "mjs fqq
mzrfspnsi xnssji flfnsxy rjd "m$ it $tz sty mfyj kjqn#1 "mt iwt!j mnx
kwnjsi kwtr mnx ittw "nym htsyzrjq$d "m$ it $tz sty j#jhwfyj ymj wzxynh
"mt xtzlmy yt ijxywt$ ymj xf!ntzw tk mnx hmnqid sf$1 ymjxj fwj !nwyztzx
fsi nrrfhzqfyj gjnslx& n1 ymj rnxjwfgqj fsi ymj fgfsitsji1 fr fs
fgtwynts1 yt gj xuzwsji fy1 fsi pnhpji1 fsi ywfruqji ts3 j!js st" r$
gqtti gtnqx fy ymj wjhtqqjhynts tk ymnx nsozxynhj3

'gzy ny nx ywzj ymfy n fr f "wjyhm3  n mf!j rzwijwji ymj qt!jq$ fsi ymj
mjquqjxx@ n mf!j xywfslqji ymj nssthjsy fx ymj$ xqjuy fsi lwfxuji yt
ijfym mnx ymwtfy "mt sj!jw nsozwji rj tw fs$ tymjw qn!nsl ymnsl3  n
mf!j ij!tyji r$ hwjfytw1 ymj xjqjhy xujhnrjs tk fqq ymfy nx "twym$ tk
qt!j fsi firnwfynts frtsl rjs1 yt rnxjw$@ n mf!j uzwxzji mnr j!js yt
ymfy nwwjrjinfgqj wzns3

'ymjwj mj qnjx1 "mnyj fsi htqi ns ijfym3  $tz mfyj rj1 gzy $tzw
fgmtwwjshj hfssty jvzfq ymfy "nym "mnhm n wjlfwi r$xjqk3  n qttp ts ymj
mfsix "mnhm j#jhzyji ymj ijji@ n ymnsp ts ymj mjfwy ns "mnhm ymj
nrflnsfynts tk ny "fx htshjn!ji fsi qtsl ktw ymj rtrjsy "mjs ymjxj
mfsix "nqq rjjy r$ j$jx1 "mjs ymfy nrflnsfynts "nqq mfzsy r$ ymtzlmyx
st rtwj3

'kjfw sty ymfy n xmfqq gj ymj nsxywzrjsy tk kzyzwj rnxhmnjk3  r$ "twp
nx sjfwq$ htruqjyj3  sjnymjw $tzwx stw fs$ rfs-x ijfym nx sjjiji yt
htsxzrrfyj ymj xjwnjx tk r$ gjnsl fsi fhhtruqnxm ymfy "mnhm rzxy gj
itsj1 gzy ny wjvznwjx r$ t"s3  it sty ymnsp ymfy n xmfqq gj xqt" yt
ujwktwr ymnx xfhwnknhj3  n xmfqq vzny $tzw !jxxjq ts ymj nhj wfky "mnhm
gwtzlmy rj ymnymjw fsi xmfqq xjjp ymj rtxy stwymjws j#ywjrny$ tk ymj
lqtgj@ n xmfqq htqqjhy r$ kzsjwfq unqj fsi htsxzrj yt fxmjx ymnx
rnxjwfgqj kwfrj1 ymfy nyx wjrfnsx rf$ fkktwi st qnlmy yt fs$ hzwntzx
fsi zsmfqqt"ji "wjyhm "mt "tzqi hwjfyj xzhm fstymjw fx n mf!j gjjs3  n
xmfqq inj3  n xmfqq st qtsljw kjjq ymj fltsnjx "mnhm st" htsxzrj rj tw
gj ymj uwj$ tk kjjqnslx zsxfynxknji1 $jy zsvzjshmji3  mj nx ijfi "mt
hfqqji rj nsyt gjnsl@ fsi "mjs n xmfqq gj st rtwj1 ymj !jw$ wjrjrgwfshj
tk zx gtym "nqq xujjinq$ !fsnxm3  n xmfqq st qtsljw xjj ymj xzs tw
xyfwx tw kjjq ymj "nsix uqf$ ts r$ hmjjpx3

'qnlmy1 kjjqnsl1 fsi xjsxj "nqq ufxx f"f$@ fsi ns ymnx htsinynts rzxy n
knsi r$ mfuunsjxx3  xtrj $jfwx flt1 "mjs ymj nrfljx "mnhm ymnx "twqi
fkktwix knwxy tujsji zuts rj1 "mjs n kjqy ymj hmjjwnsl "fwrym tk xzrrjw
fsi mjfwi ymj wzxyqnsl tk ymj qjf!jx fsi ymj "fwgqnsl tk ymj gnwix1 fsi
ymjxj "jwj fqq yt rj1 n xmtzqi mf!j "juy yt inj@ st" ny nx r$ tsq$
htsxtqfynts3  utqqzyji g$ hwnrjx fsi ytws g$ ymj gnyyjwjxy wjrtwxj1
"mjwj hfs n knsi wjxy gzy ns ijfymd

'kfwj"jqq&  n qjf!j $tz1 fsi ns $tz ymj qfxy tk mzrfspnsi "mtr ymjxj
j$jx "nqq j!jw gjmtqi3 kfwj"jqq1 kwfspjsxyjns& nk ymtz "jwy $jy fqn!j
fsi $jy hmjwnxmji f ijxnwj tk wj!jslj flfnsxy rj1 ny "tzqi gj gjyyjw
xfynfyji ns r$ qnkj ymfs ns r$ ijxywzhynts3 gzy ny "fx sty xt@ ymtz
inixy xjjp r$ j#ynshynts1 ymfy n rnlmy sty hfzxj lwjfyjw "wjyhmjisjxx@
fsi nk $jy1 ns xtrj rtij zspst"s yt rj1 ymtz mfixy sty hjfxji yt ymnsp
fsi kjjq1 ymtz "tzqixy sty ijxnwj flfnsxy rj f !jsljfshj lwjfyjw ymfs
ymfy "mnhm n kjjq3 gqfxyji fx ymtz "jwy1 r$ flts$ "fx xynqq xzujwntw yt
ymnsj1 ktw ymj gnyyjw xynsl tk wjrtwxj "nqq sty hjfxj yt wfspqj ns r$
"tzsix zsynq ijfym xmfqq hqtxj ymjr ktwj!jw3

'gzy xtts1' mj hwnji "nym xfi fsi xtqjrs jsymzxnfxr1 'n xmfqq inj1 fsi
"mfy n st" kjjq gj st qtsljw kjqy3  xtts ymjxj gzwsnsl rnxjwnjx "nqq gj
j#ynshy3  n xmfqq fxhjsi r$ kzsjwfq unqj ywnzrumfsyq$ fsi j#zqy ns ymj
flts$ tk ymj ytwyzwnsl kqfrjx3 ymj qnlmy tk ymfy htskqflwfynts "nqq
kfij f"f$@ r$ fxmjx "nqq gj x"juy nsyt ymj xjf g$ ymj "nsix3  r$ xunwny
"nqq xqjju ns ujfhj1 tw nk ny ymnspx1 ny "nqq sty xzwjq$ ymnsp ymzx3
kfwj"jqq3'

mj xuwfsl kwtr ymj hfgns "nsit" fx mj xfni ymnx1 zuts ymj nhj wfky
"mnhm qf$ hqtxj yt ymj !jxxjq3  mj "fx xtts gtwsj f"f$ g$ ymj "f!jx fsi
qtxy ns ifwpsjxx fsi inxyfshj3










jsi tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl jgttp tk kwfspjsxyjns1 g$ 
rfw$ "tqqxytsjhwfky .lti"ns/ xmjqqj$

*** jsi tk ymnx uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl jgttp kwfspjsxyjns ***

***** ymnx knqj xmtzqi gj sfrji =93y#y tw =93%nu *****
ymnx fsi fqq fxxthnfyji knqjx tk !fwntzx ktwrfyx "nqq gj ktzsi ns?
        myyu?44"""3lzyjsgjwl3twl4=4=94

uwtizhji g$ ozinym gtxx1 hmwnxy$ umnqqnux1 q$ss mfssnsjs1
fsi if!ni rjqy%jw3 myrq !jwxnts g$ fq mfnsjx3


zuifyji jinyntsx "nqq wjuqfhj ymj uwj!ntzx tsj22ymj tqi jinyntsx
"nqq gj wjsfrji3

hwjfynsl ymj "twpx kwtr uzgqnh itrfns uwnsy jinyntsx rjfsx ymfy st
tsj t"sx f zsnyji xyfyjx htu$wnlmy ns ymjxj "twpx1 xt ymj ktzsifynts
.fsi $tz&/ hfs htu$ fsi inxywngzyj ny ns ymj zsnyji xyfyjx "nymtzy
ujwrnxxnts fsi "nymtzy uf$nsl htu$wnlmy wt$fqynjx3  xujhnfq wzqjx1
xjy ktwym ns ymj ljsjwfq yjwrx tk zxj ufwy tk ymnx qnhjsxj1 fuuq$ yt
htu$nsl fsi inxywngzynsl uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx yt
uwtyjhy ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr htshjuy fsi ywfijrfwp3  uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp1 fsi rf$ sty gj zxji nk $tz
hmfwlj ktw ymj jgttpx1 zsqjxx $tz wjhjn!j xujhnknh ujwrnxxnts3  nk $tz
it sty hmfwlj fs$ymnsl ktw htunjx tk ymnx jgttp1 htruq$nsl "nym ymj
wzqjx nx !jw$ jfx$3  $tz rf$ zxj ymnx jgttp ktw sjfwq$ fs$ uzwutxj
xzhm fx hwjfynts tk ijwn!fyn!j "twpx1 wjutwyx1 ujwktwrfshjx fsi
wjxjfwhm3  ymj$ rf$ gj rtinknji fsi uwnsyji fsi ln!js f"f$22$tz rf$ it
uwfhynhfqq$ fs$ymnsl "nym uzgqnh itrfns jgttpx3  wjinxywngzynts nx
xzgojhy yt ymj ywfijrfwp qnhjsxj1 jxujhnfqq$ htrrjwhnfq
wjinxywngzynts3



*** xyfwy? kzqq qnhjsxj ***

ymj kzqq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnhjsxj
uqjfxj wjfi ymnx gjktwj $tz inxywngzyj tw zxj ymnx "twp

yt uwtyjhy ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl ymj kwjj
inxywngzynts tk jqjhywtsnh "twpx1 g$ zxnsl tw inxywngzynsl ymnx "twp
.tw fs$ tymjw "twp fxxthnfyji ns fs$ "f$ "nym ymj umwfxj 'uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl'/1 $tz flwjj yt htruq$ "nym fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymj kzqq uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr qnhjsxj .f!fnqfgqj "nym ymnx knqj tw tsqnsj fy
myyu?44lzyjsgjwl3sjy4qnhjsxj/3


xjhynts 63  ljsjwfq yjwrx tk zxj fsi wjinxywngzynsl uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
jqjhywtsnh "twpx

63f3  g$ wjfinsl tw zxnsl fs$ ufwy tk ymnx uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
jqjhywtsnh "twp1 $tz nsinhfyj ymfy $tz mf!j wjfi1 zsijwxyfsi1 flwjj yt
fsi fhhjuy fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymnx qnhjsxj fsi nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtujwy$
.ywfijrfwp4htu$wnlmy/ flwjjrjsy3  nk $tz it sty flwjj yt fgnij g$ fqq
ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy1 $tz rzxy hjfxj zxnsl fsi wjyzws tw ijxywt$
fqq htunjx tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx ns $tzw utxxjxxnts3
nk $tz ufni f kjj ktw tgyfnsnsl f htu$ tk tw fhhjxx yt f uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twp fsi $tz it sty flwjj yt gj gtzsi g$ ymj
yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy1 $tz rf$ tgyfns f wjkzsi kwtr ymj ujwxts tw
jsyny$ yt "mtr $tz ufni ymj kjj fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum 63j3=3

63g3  'uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl' nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp3  ny rf$ tsq$ gj
zxji ts tw fxxthnfyji ns fs$ "f$ "nym fs jqjhywtsnh "twp g$ ujtuqj "mt
flwjj yt gj gtzsi g$ ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy3  ymjwj fwj f kj"
ymnslx ymfy $tz hfs it "nym rtxy uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx
j!js "nymtzy htruq$nsl "nym ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy3  xjj
ufwflwfum 63h gjqt"3  ymjwj fwj f qty tk ymnslx $tz hfs it "nym uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx nk $tz ktqqt" ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy
fsi mjqu uwjxjw!j kwjj kzyzwj fhhjxx yt uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh
"twpx3  xjj ufwflwfum 63j gjqt"3

63h3  ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts .'ymj ktzsifynts'
tw ulqfk/1 t"sx f htrunqfynts htu$wnlmy ns ymj htqqjhynts tk uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx3  sjfwq$ fqq ymj nsin!nizfq "twpx ns ymj
htqqjhynts fwj ns ymj uzgqnh itrfns ns ymj zsnyji xyfyjx3  nk fs
nsin!nizfq "twp nx ns ymj uzgqnh itrfns ns ymj zsnyji xyfyjx fsi $tz fwj
qthfyji ns ymj zsnyji xyfyjx1 "j it sty hqfnr f wnlmy yt uwj!jsy $tz kwtr
htu$nsl1 inxywngzynsl1 ujwktwrnsl1 inxuqf$nsl tw hwjfynsl ijwn!fyn!j
"twpx gfxji ts ymj "twp fx qtsl fx fqq wjkjwjshjx yt uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl
fwj wjrt!ji3  tk htzwxj1 "j mtuj ymfy $tz "nqq xzuutwy ymj uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl kwjj fhhjxx yt jqjhywtsnh "twpx g$
kwjjq$ xmfwnsl uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twpx ns htruqnfshj "nym ymj yjwrx tk
ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw pjjunsl ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr sfrj fxxthnfyji "nym
ymj "twp3  $tz hfs jfxnq$ htruq$ "nym ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy g$
pjjunsl ymnx "twp ns ymj xfrj ktwrfy "nym nyx fyyfhmji kzqq uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr qnhjsxj "mjs $tz xmfwj ny "nymtzy hmfwlj "nym tymjwx3

63i3  ymj htu$wnlmy qf"x tk ymj uqfhj "mjwj $tz fwj qthfyji fqxt lt!jws
"mfy $tz hfs it "nym ymnx "twp3  htu$wnlmy qf"x ns rtxy htzsywnjx fwj ns
f htsxyfsy xyfyj tk hmfslj3  nk $tz fwj tzyxnij ymj zsnyji xyfyjx1 hmjhp
ymj qf"x tk $tzw htzsyw$ ns fiinynts yt ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy
gjktwj it"sqtfinsl1 htu$nsl1 inxuqf$nsl1 ujwktwrnsl1 inxywngzynsl tw
hwjfynsl ijwn!fyn!j "twpx gfxji ts ymnx "twp tw fs$ tymjw uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr "twp3  ymj ktzsifynts rfpjx st wjuwjxjsyfyntsx htshjwsnsl
ymj htu$wnlmy xyfyzx tk fs$ "twp ns fs$ htzsyw$ tzyxnij ymj zsnyji
xyfyjx3

63j3  zsqjxx $tz mf!j wjrt!ji fqq wjkjwjshjx yt uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl?

63j363  ymj ktqqt"nsl xjsyjshj1 "nym fhyn!j qnspx yt1 tw tymjw nrrjinfyj
fhhjxx yt1 ymj kzqq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr qnhjsxj rzxy fuujfw uwtrnsjsyq$
"mjsj!jw fs$ htu$ tk f uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twp .fs$ "twp ts "mnhm ymj
umwfxj 'uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl' fuujfwx1 tw "nym "mnhm ymj umwfxj 'uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl' nx fxxthnfyji/ nx fhhjxxji1 inxuqf$ji1 ujwktwrji1 !nj"ji1
htunji tw inxywngzyji?

ymnx jgttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fs$tsj fs$"mjwj fy st htxy fsi "nym
fqrtxy st wjxywnhyntsx "mfyxtj!jw3  $tz rf$ htu$ ny1 ln!j ny f"f$ tw
wj2zxj ny zsijw ymj yjwrx tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnhjsxj nshqziji
"nym ymnx jgttp tw tsqnsj fy """3lzyjsgjwl3sjy

63j373  nk fs nsin!nizfq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twp nx ijwn!ji
kwtr ymj uzgqnh itrfns .itjx sty htsyfns f stynhj nsinhfynsl ymfy ny nx
utxyji "nym ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htu$wnlmy mtqijw/1 ymj "twp hfs gj htunji
fsi inxywngzyji yt fs$tsj ns ymj zsnyji xyfyjx "nymtzy uf$nsl fs$ kjjx
tw hmfwljx3  nk $tz fwj wjinxywngzynsl tw uwt!ninsl fhhjxx yt f "twp
"nym ymj umwfxj 'uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl' fxxthnfyji "nym tw fuujfwnsl ts ymj
"twp1 $tz rzxy htruq$ jnymjw "nym ymj wjvznwjrjsyx tk ufwflwfumx 63j36
ymwtzlm 63j3< tw tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ktw ymj zxj tk ymj "twp fsi ymj
uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr ywfijrfwp fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfumx 63j3= tw
63j3>3

63j383  nk fs nsin!nizfq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twp nx utxyji
"nym ymj ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htu$wnlmy mtqijw1 $tzw zxj fsi inxywngzynts
rzxy htruq$ "nym gtym ufwflwfumx 63j36 ymwtzlm 63j3< fsi fs$ fiinyntsfq
yjwrx nrutxji g$ ymj htu$wnlmy mtqijw3  fiinyntsfq yjwrx "nqq gj qnspji
yt ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr qnhjsxj ktw fqq "twpx utxyji "nym ymj
ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htu$wnlmy mtqijw ktzsi fy ymj gjlnssnsl tk ymnx "twp3

63j393  it sty zsqnsp tw ijyfhm tw wjrt!j ymj kzqq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
qnhjsxj yjwrx kwtr ymnx "twp1 tw fs$ knqjx htsyfnsnsl f ufwy tk ymnx
"twp tw fs$ tymjw "twp fxxthnfyji "nym uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr3

63j3:3  it sty htu$1 inxuqf$1 ujwktwr1 inxywngzyj tw wjinxywngzyj ymnx
jqjhywtsnh "twp1 tw fs$ ufwy tk ymnx jqjhywtsnh "twp1 "nymtzy
uwtrnsjsyq$ inxuqf$nsl ymj xjsyjshj xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum 63j36 "nym
fhyn!j qnspx tw nrrjinfyj fhhjxx yt ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymj uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr qnhjsxj3

63j3;3  $tz rf$ hts!jwy yt fsi inxywngzyj ymnx "twp ns fs$ gnsfw$1
htruwjxxji1 rfwpji zu1 stsuwtuwnjyfw$ tw uwtuwnjyfw$ ktwr1 nshqzinsl fs$
"twi uwthjxxnsl tw m$ujwyj#y ktwr3  mt"j!jw1 nk $tz uwt!nij fhhjxx yt tw
inxywngzyj htunjx tk f uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twp ns f ktwrfy tymjw ymfs
'uqfns !fsnqqf fxhnn' tw tymjw ktwrfy zxji ns ymj tkknhnfq !jwxnts
utxyji ts ymj tkknhnfq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "jg xnyj ."""3lzyjsgjwl3sjy/1
$tz rzxy1 fy st fiinyntsfq htxy1 kjj tw j#ujsxj yt ymj zxjw1 uwt!nij f
htu$1 f rjfsx tk j#utwynsl f htu$1 tw f rjfsx tk tgyfnsnsl f htu$ zuts
wjvzjxy1 tk ymj "twp ns nyx twnlnsfq 'uqfns !fsnqqf fxhnn' tw tymjw
ktwr3  fs$ fqyjwsfyj ktwrfy rzxy nshqzij ymj kzqq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
qnhjsxj fx xujhnknji ns ufwflwfum 63j363

63j3<3  it sty hmfwlj f kjj ktw fhhjxx yt1 !nj"nsl1 inxuqf$nsl1
ujwktwrnsl1 htu$nsl tw inxywngzynsl fs$ uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twpx
zsqjxx $tz htruq$ "nym ufwflwfum 63j3= tw 63j3>3

63j3=3  $tz rf$ hmfwlj f wjfxtsfgqj kjj ktw htunjx tk tw uwt!ninsl
fhhjxx yt tw inxywngzynsl uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx uwt!niji
ymfy

2 $tz uf$ f wt$fqy$ kjj tk 75+ tk ymj lwtxx uwtknyx $tz ijwn!j kwtr
     ymj zxj tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twpx hfqhzqfyji zxnsl ymj rjymti
     $tz fqwjfi$ zxj yt hfqhzqfyj $tzw fuuqnhfgqj yf#jx3  ymj kjj nx
     t"ji yt ymj t"sjw tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr ywfijrfwp1 gzy mj
     mfx flwjji yt itsfyj wt$fqynjx zsijw ymnx ufwflwfum yt ymj
     uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts3  wt$fqy$ uf$rjsyx
     rzxy gj ufni "nymns ;5 if$x ktqqt"nsl jfhm ifyj ts "mnhm $tz
     uwjufwj .tw fwj qjlfqq$ wjvznwji yt uwjufwj/ $tzw ujwntinh yf#
     wjyzwsx3  wt$fqy$ uf$rjsyx xmtzqi gj hqjfwq$ rfwpji fx xzhm fsi
     xjsy yt ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts fy ymj
     fiiwjxx xujhnknji ns xjhynts 91 'nsktwrfynts fgtzy itsfyntsx yt
     ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts3'

2 $tz uwt!nij f kzqq wjkzsi tk fs$ rtsj$ ufni g$ f zxjw "mt stynknjx
     $tz ns "wnynsl .tw g$ j2rfnq/ "nymns 85 if$x tk wjhjnuy ymfy x4mj
     itjx sty flwjj yt ymj yjwrx tk ymj kzqq uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
     qnhjsxj3  $tz rzxy wjvznwj xzhm f zxjw yt wjyzws tw
     ijxywt$ fqq htunjx tk ymj "twpx utxxjxxji ns f um$xnhfq rjinzr
     fsi inxhtsynszj fqq zxj tk fsi fqq fhhjxx yt tymjw htunjx tk
     uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twpx3

2 $tz uwt!nij1 ns fhhtwifshj "nym ufwflwfum 63k381 f kzqq wjkzsi tk fs$
     rtsj$ ufni ktw f "twp tw f wjuqfhjrjsy htu$1 nk f ijkjhy ns ymj
     jqjhywtsnh "twp nx inxht!jwji fsi wjutwyji yt $tz "nymns >5 if$x
     tk wjhjnuy tk ymj "twp3

2 $tz htruq$ "nym fqq tymjw yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw kwjj
     inxywngzynts tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twpx3

63j3>3  nk $tz "nxm yt hmfwlj f kjj tw inxywngzyj f uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
jqjhywtsnh "twp tw lwtzu tk "twpx ts inkkjwjsy yjwrx ymfs fwj xjy
ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy1 $tz rzxy tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ns "wnynsl kwtr
gtym ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts fsi rnhmfjq
mfwy1 ymj t"sjw tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr ywfijrfwp3  htsyfhy ymj
ktzsifynts fx xjy ktwym ns xjhynts 8 gjqt"3

63k3

63k363  uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl !tqzsyjjwx fsi jruqt$jjx j#ujsi htsxnijwfgqj
jkktwy yt nijsynk$1 it htu$wnlmy wjxjfwhm ts1 ywfsxhwngj fsi uwttkwjfi
uzgqnh itrfns "twpx ns hwjfynsl ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
htqqjhynts3  ijxunyj ymjxj jkktwyx1 uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh
"twpx1 fsi ymj rjinzr ts "mnhm ymj$ rf$ gj xytwji1 rf$ htsyfns
'ijkjhyx1' xzhm fx1 gzy sty qnrnyji yt1 nshtruqjyj1 nsfhhzwfyj tw
htwwzuy ifyf1 ywfsxhwnuynts jwwtwx1 f htu$wnlmy tw tymjw nsyjqqjhyzfq
uwtujwy$ nskwnsljrjsy1 f ijkjhyn!j tw ifrflji inxp tw tymjw rjinzr1 f
htruzyjw !nwzx1 tw htruzyjw htijx ymfy ifrflj tw hfssty gj wjfi g$
$tzw jvznurjsy3

63k373  qnrnyji "fwwfsy$1 inxhqfnrjw tk ifrfljx 2 j#hjuy ktw ymj 'wnlmy
tk wjuqfhjrjsy tw wjkzsi' ijxhwngji ns ufwflwfum 63k381 ymj uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts1 ymj t"sjw tk ymj uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr ywfijrfwp1 fsi fs$ tymjw ufwy$ inxywngzynsl f uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twp zsijw ymnx flwjjrjsy1 inxhqfnr fqq
qnfgnqny$ yt $tz ktw ifrfljx1 htxyx fsi j#ujsxjx1 nshqzinsl qjlfq
kjjx3  $tz flwjj ymfy $tz mf!j st wjrjinjx ktw sjlqnljshj1 xywnhy
qnfgnqny$1 gwjfhm tk "fwwfsy$ tw gwjfhm tk htsywfhy j#hjuy ymtxj
uwt!niji ns ufwflwfum k83  $tz flwjj ymfy ymj ktzsifynts1 ymj
ywfijrfwp t"sjw1 fsi fs$ inxywngzytw zsijw ymnx flwjjrjsy "nqq sty gj
qnfgqj yt $tz ktw fhyzfq1 inwjhy1 nsinwjhy1 htsxjvzjsynfq1 uzsnyn!j tw
nshnijsyfq ifrfljx j!js nk $tz ln!j stynhj tk ymj utxxngnqny$ tk xzhm
ifrflj3

63k383  qnrnyji wnlmy tk wjuqfhjrjsy tw wjkzsi 2 nk $tz inxht!jw f
ijkjhy ns ymnx jqjhywtsnh "twp "nymns >5 if$x tk wjhjn!nsl ny1 $tz hfs
wjhjn!j f wjkzsi tk ymj rtsj$ .nk fs$/ $tz ufni ktw ny g$ xjsinsl f
"wnyyjs j#uqfsfynts yt ymj ujwxts $tz wjhjn!ji ymj "twp kwtr3  nk $tz
wjhjn!ji ymj "twp ts f um$xnhfq rjinzr1 $tz rzxy wjyzws ymj rjinzr "nym
$tzw "wnyyjs j#uqfsfynts3  ymj ujwxts tw jsyny$ ymfy uwt!niji $tz "nym
ymj ijkjhyn!j "twp rf$ jqjhy yt uwt!nij f wjuqfhjrjsy htu$ ns qnjz tk f
wjkzsi3  nk $tz wjhjn!ji ymj "twp jqjhywtsnhfqq$1 ymj ujwxts tw jsyny$
uwt!ninsl ny yt $tz rf$ hmttxj yt ln!j $tz f xjhtsi tuutwyzsny$ yt
wjhjn!j ymj "twp jqjhywtsnhfqq$ ns qnjz tk f wjkzsi3  nk ymj xjhtsi htu$
nx fqxt ijkjhyn!j1 $tz rf$ ijrfsi f wjkzsi ns "wnynsl "nymtzy kzwymjw
tuutwyzsnynjx yt kn# ymj uwtgqjr3

63k393  j#hjuy ktw ymj qnrnyji wnlmy tk wjuqfhjrjsy tw wjkzsi xjy ktwym
ns ufwflwfum 63k381 ymnx "twp nx uwt!niji yt $tz -fx2nx- "nym st tymjw
"fwwfsynjx tk fs$ pnsi1 j#uwjxx tw nruqnji1 nshqzinsl gzy sty qnrnyji yt
"fwwfsynjx tk rjwhmfsyngnqny$ tw knysjxx ktw fs$ uzwutxj3

63k3:3  xtrj xyfyjx it sty fqqt" inxhqfnrjwx tk hjwyfns nruqnji
"fwwfsynjx tw ymj j#hqzxnts tw qnrnyfynts tk hjwyfns y$ujx tk ifrfljx3
nk fs$ inxhqfnrjw tw qnrnyfynts xjy ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy !ntqfyjx ymj
qf" tk ymj xyfyj fuuqnhfgqj yt ymnx flwjjrjsy1 ymj flwjjrjsy xmfqq gj
nsyjwuwjyji yt rfpj ymj rf#nrzr inxhqfnrjw tw qnrnyfynts ujwrnyyji g$
ymj fuuqnhfgqj xyfyj qf"3  ymj ns!fqniny$ tw zsjsktwhjfgnqny$ tk fs$
uwt!nxnts tk ymnx flwjjrjsy xmfqq sty !tni ymj wjrfnsnsl uwt!nxntsx3

63k3;3  nsijrsny$ 2 $tz flwjj yt nsijrsnk$ fsi mtqi ymj ktzsifynts1 ymj
ywfijrfwp t"sjw1 fs$ fljsy tw jruqt$jj tk ymj ktzsifynts1 fs$tsj
uwt!ninsl htunjx tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx ns fhhtwifshj
"nym ymnx flwjjrjsy1 fsi fs$ !tqzsyjjwx fxxthnfyji "nym ymj uwtizhynts1
uwtrtynts fsi inxywngzynts tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh "twpx1
mfwrqjxx kwtr fqq qnfgnqny$1 htxyx fsi j#ujsxjx1 nshqzinsl qjlfq kjjx1
ymfy fwnxj inwjhyq$ tw nsinwjhyq$ kwtr fs$ tk ymj ktqqt"nsl "mnhm $tz it
tw hfzxj yt thhzw? .f/ inxywngzynts tk ymnx tw fs$ uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
"twp1 .g/ fqyjwfynts1 rtinknhfynts1 tw fiinyntsx tw ijqjyntsx yt fs$
uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr "twp1 fsi .h/ fs$ ijkjhy $tz hfzxj3


xjhynts  73  nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj rnxxnts tk uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr

uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr nx x$sts$rtzx "nym ymj kwjj inxywngzynts tk
jqjhywtsnh "twpx ns ktwrfyx wjfifgqj g$ ymj "nijxy !fwnjy$ tk htruzyjwx
nshqzinsl tgxtqjyj1 tqi1 rniiqj2flji fsi sj" htruzyjwx3  ny j#nxyx
gjhfzxj tk ymj jkktwyx tk mzsiwjix tk !tqzsyjjwx fsi itsfyntsx kwtr
ujtuqj ns fqq "fqpx tk qnkj3

!tqzsyjjwx fsi knsfshnfq xzuutwy yt uwt!nij !tqzsyjjwx "nym ymj
fxxnxyfshj ymj$ sjji1 nx hwnynhfq yt wjfhmnsl uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr-x
ltfqx fsi jsxzwnsl ymfy ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr htqqjhynts "nqq
wjrfns kwjjq$ f!fnqfgqj ktw ljsjwfyntsx yt htrj3  ns 75561 ymj uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts "fx hwjfyji yt uwt!nij f xjhzwj
fsi ujwrfsjsy kzyzwj ktw uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr fsi kzyzwj ljsjwfyntsx3
yt qjfws rtwj fgtzy ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts
fsi mt" $tzw jkktwyx fsi itsfyntsx hfs mjqu1 xjj xjhyntsx 8 fsi 9
fsi ymj ktzsifynts "jg uflj fy myyu?44"""3ulqfk3twl3


xjhynts 83  nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j
ktzsifynts

ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts nx f sts uwtkny
:56.h/.8/ jizhfyntsfq htwutwfynts twlfsn%ji zsijw ymj qf"x tk ymj
xyfyj tk rnxxnxxnuun fsi lwfsyji yf# j#jruy xyfyzx g$ ymj nsyjwsfq
wj!jszj xjw!nhj3  ymj ktzsifynts-x jns tw kjijwfq yf# nijsynknhfynts
szrgjw nx ;92;776:963  nyx :56.h/.8/ qjyyjw nx utxyji fy
myyu?44ulqfk3twl4kzsiwfnxnsl3  htsywngzyntsx yt ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl
qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts fwj yf# ijizhyngqj yt ymj kzqq j#yjsy
ujwrnyyji g$ z3x3 kjijwfq qf"x fsi $tzw xyfyj-x qf"x3

ymj ktzsifynts-x uwnshnufq tkknhj nx qthfyji fy 9::< rjqfs iw3 x3
kfnwgfspx1 fp1 >><6731 gzy nyx !tqzsyjjwx fsi jruqt$jjx fwj xhfyyjwji
ymwtzlmtzy szrjwtzx qthfyntsx3  nyx gzxnsjxx tkknhj nx qthfyji fy
=5> stwym 6:55 "jxy1 xfqy qfpj hny$1 zy =966;1 .=56/ :>;26==<1 jrfnq
gzxnsjxxeulqfk3twl3  jrfnq htsyfhy qnspx fsi zu yt ifyj htsyfhy
nsktwrfynts hfs gj ktzsi fy ymj ktzsifynts-x "jg xnyj fsi tkknhnfq
uflj fy myyu?44ulqfk3twl

ktw fiinyntsfq htsyfhy nsktwrfynts?
     iw3 lwjltw$ g3 sj"g$
     hmnjk j#jhzyn!j fsi inwjhytw
     lgsj"g$eulqfk3twl


xjhynts 93  nsktwrfynts fgtzy itsfyntsx yt ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl
qnyjwfw$ fwhmn!j ktzsifynts

uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr ijujsix zuts fsi hfssty xzw!n!j "nymtzy "nij
xuwjfi uzgqnh xzuutwy fsi itsfyntsx yt hfww$ tzy nyx rnxxnts tk
nshwjfxnsl ymj szrgjw tk uzgqnh itrfns fsi qnhjsxji "twpx ymfy hfs gj
kwjjq$ inxywngzyji ns rfhmnsj wjfifgqj ktwr fhhjxxngqj g$ ymj "nijxy
fwwf$ tk jvznurjsy nshqzinsl tzyifyji jvznurjsy3  rfs$ xrfqq itsfyntsx
.)6 yt ):1555/ fwj ufwynhzqfwq$ nrutwyfsy yt rfnsyfnsnsl yf# j#jruy
xyfyzx "nym ymj nwx3

ymj ktzsifynts nx htrrnyyji yt htruq$nsl "nym ymj qf"x wjlzqfynsl
hmfwnynjx fsi hmfwnyfgqj itsfyntsx ns fqq :5 xyfyjx tk ymj zsnyji
xyfyjx3  htruqnfshj wjvznwjrjsyx fwj sty zsnktwr fsi ny yfpjx f
htsxnijwfgqj jkktwy1 rzhm ufujw"twp fsi rfs$ kjjx yt rjjy fsi pjju zu
"nym ymjxj wjvznwjrjsyx3  "j it sty xtqnhny itsfyntsx ns qthfyntsx
"mjwj "j mf!j sty wjhjn!ji "wnyyjs htsknwrfynts tk htruqnfshj3  yt
xjsi itsfyntsx tw ijyjwrnsj ymj xyfyzx tk htruqnfshj ktw fs$
ufwynhzqfw xyfyj !nxny myyu?44ulqfk3twl

"mnqj "j hfssty fsi it sty xtqnhny htsywngzyntsx kwtr xyfyjx "mjwj "j
mf!j sty rjy ymj xtqnhnyfynts wjvznwjrjsyx1 "j pst" tk st uwtmngnynts
flfnsxy fhhjuynsl zsxtqnhnyji itsfyntsx kwtr itstwx ns xzhm xyfyjx "mt
fuuwtfhm zx "nym tkkjwx yt itsfyj3

nsyjwsfyntsfq itsfyntsx fwj lwfyjkzqq$ fhhjuyji1 gzy "j hfssty rfpj
fs$ xyfyjrjsyx htshjwsnsl yf# ywjfyrjsy tk itsfyntsx wjhjn!ji kwtr
tzyxnij ymj zsnyji xyfyjx3  z3x3 qf"x fqtsj x"fru tzw xrfqq xyfkk3

uqjfxj hmjhp ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl "jg ufljx ktw hzwwjsy itsfynts
rjymtix fsi fiiwjxxjx3  itsfyntsx fwj fhhjuyji ns f szrgjw tk tymjw
"f$x nshqzinsl nshqzinsl hmjhpx1 tsqnsj uf$rjsyx fsi hwjiny hfwi
itsfyntsx3  yt itsfyj1 uqjfxj !nxny? myyu?44ulqfk3twl4itsfyj


xjhynts :3  ljsjwfq nsktwrfynts fgtzy uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jqjhywtsnh
"twpx3

uwtkjxxtw rnhmfjq x3 mfwy nx ymj twnlnsfytw tk ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr
htshjuy tk f qngwfw$ tk jqjhywtsnh "twpx ymfy htzqi gj kwjjq$ xmfwji
"nym fs$tsj3  ktw ymnwy$ $jfwx1 mj uwtizhji fsi inxywngzyji uwtojhy
lzyjsgjwl2yr jgttpx "nym tsq$ f qttxj sjy"twp tk !tqzsyjjw xzuutwy3


uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr jgttpx fwj tkyjs hwjfyji kwtr xj!jwfq uwnsyji
jinyntsx1 fqq tk "mnhm fwj htsknwrji fx uzgqnh itrfns ns ymj z3x3
zsqjxx f htu$wnlmy stynhj nx nshqziji3  ymzx1 "j it sty sjhjxxfwnq$
pjju jgttpx ns htruqnfshj "nym fs$ ufwynhzqfw ufujw jinynts3


rtxy ujtuqj xyfwy fy tzw "jg xnyj "mnhm mfx ymj rfns ul xjfwhm kfhnqny$?

     myyu?44"""3lzyjsgjwl3sjy

ymnx "jg xnyj nshqzijx nsktwrfynts fgtzy uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl2yr1
nshqzinsl mt" yt rfpj itsfyntsx yt ymj uwtojhy lzyjsgjwl qnyjwfw$
fwhmn!j ktzsifynts1 mt" yt mjqu uwtizhj tzw sj" jgttpx1 fsi mt" yt
xzgxhwngj yt tzw jrfnq sj"xqjyyjw yt mjfw fgtzy sj" jgttpx3